---
title: Grain vortex in Houdini tutorial
source: YouTube
url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8fcfu6gmzUQ
author: raphaël
ingested: 2026-06-23
houdini_version: "Not specified"
tags: ["dop", "sop", "rbd", "simulation", "procedural", "advanced"]
extraction_status: complete
frames_dir: tutorials/frames/grain-vortex-in-houdini-tutorial/
frame_count: 4
---

# Grain vortex in Houdini tutorial

**Source:** [YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8fcfu6gmzUQ)
**Author:** raphaël
**Duration:** 24m59s | 1 section(s)

---

## Raw Data (for Claude Code extraction)


### Full Content [0:00]
**Transcript:** Hey guys, I hope you're doing good. Today I'm going to be showing you how I made this animation in Houdini using a bullet solver. Before we start, if you want to grab the scene file for this, you can do so on my Gumroad for a couple bucks. Alright, so let's get started with a Geonode, of course, and then I'm going to bring in the Geometry I want to scatter. In my case, it's going to be a rock, but I grab from Megascans. And I'm taking the high polyversion. We're going to reduce it down to make it proxy for the simulation. And then at the end, we're going to put the high poly back onto our simulated points. Okay, so as you can see, it's massive, so we're going to need to match size it down. Let's make it two centimeters and scale to fit. Also, I want to remove some attributes I don't need. I just want to keep position normal UV and that's it. Alright, so this is going to be our high poly geo. Let's create a null for it. Whoops. Okay, and now we need a low polyversion for the sim, so let's do a poly reduce. Alright, so we currently have about a million faces, which is way too much. Let's go point O1 on the percent to keep. There we go. We now have a hundred faces, 50 points. And I think this is about as low as we can go while keeping the general shape of the rock. Cool, so this is going to be our out low. There we go. Okay, cool, so we have our geo ready. Now we need to prepare the points to scatter around to. So let's add a box. And I use, let's preview it. I use these dimensions for my sim. Then I want to scatter points inside that volume. So first turn it into a volume with ISO offset, crank this up, and then scatter. There we go. I went with 10,000 points. Okay, so now we can do a copy to points. Just like so. And it's working, but we have the same orientation for every rock, which we don't want. So let's use a Mops randomize node. There we go, and just take on randomize orientation. And boom. Okay, so now if we just pipe this into a RBD sim, it's going to explode. Because we have a bunch of intersecting geometry, which we don't want. So one way to de-intersect geometry, I'm going to show you. There's a bunch of ways in who do you need, but when you don't have like spherical geometry, it's a bit trickier. One way I found is to use a boolean. Wait for it to load here. I'm just going to cancel. And change the operation to detect. That's it. And then output A by A polygons. And if we blast everything but that. Select it here, delete, non-selected. So these are going to be all the polygons that intersect with other polygons. Now we can use this to find the nearest points in our point cloud here. Based on this intersecting geo, so find the nearest point and then delete it. And then we do another copy to points. And ideally, that should get rid of all the intersecting geo. Alright, so let's do a proximity sub. Like so. And so this is going to output or highlight every point that's close to this mesh. So we can turn on the search radius by a lot actually. And that looks better. Now we want to make sure to output a group called nearby with freaking blast. Okay, so if we compare this, these like points to these, you can see we did remove a bunch of them. Which is what we want. And then let's do another copy to points with these points. And there we go. If we compare it to before, you can see it did remove some geometry. But not too much. I think this is fine. We can play with the search radius here. Maybe make it a bit smaller. And I think that's too much. But to make sure, if you want to be sure, you can just copy these notes here and run the same operation again. And if we still got geometry here, it means we still have intersections. So let's move that up again. And there we go. We now have no geometry here, which means there are no intersections in our scattered geo here. Cool. So that's ready for the bullet sim. But before that, we're going to need a collider. Because if we just send this, the points, the rocks are going to fall down and that's it. So we can use this box again. Let's go to a side view front view here. And you can see, actually, let's look at this box and then preview our geo here. You can see that because we scattered rocks on the points, it goes outside of the bounds of our box, which means we need to do a little peak. And just move that up until we don't get intersections anymore. Cool. So now I want to remove the top of this box because we don't need it. Just select the prem here. All right. And now I want to add some thickness to this because we do need a geometry with thickness to act as a collider in simulations. Let's do a poly extrude. There we go. Move that up a bit. And make sure we output the back. Okay. And that's our collider ready. Let's put a note here. Cool. And also, before we start with the simulation, you can see that this is about a meter across. And I just want to scale that up because I found that with RBD sims. When you really scale up your entire scene, you get faster and more accurate. Or rather, it's cheaper. It's faster to get simulations that are as accurate. So yes, just much less of a hassle to work on. So let's do a form. I'm going to color it red just so we remember it. And scale everything up by five on our scattergeo. I only to do the same thing here for our collider. Cool. So now we can add a bullet solver. Right here. Plug that in. Plug that in. Okay. For a self-stub. I don't need this many. I found that five was enough for this sim. I do want to check. Wait for the load here. I do want to check our collision. How it's looking. Always a bit slow. Okay. And if we press W, we can see our blue collision geo here. It doesn't quite line up with our mesh. So let's go to properties and turn this padding down. 0.002. And there we go. Now it lines up a lot better with our mesh. And let's check the collisions for the actually does it. Yeah, it looks good. Let's check our box here. Go to right here, show collision shape on the collision geo. Wait for that to load. It's always long for some reason. We have an issue because right now it is a convex hole. We need to change it to convex to concave. And nice. There we go. Just double check. Yeah, it lines up perfectly. Cool. Very same. I'm just going to turn off the visualization because it just lags a ton. All right. I'm also going to turn off our collision geo. And let's send like 30-ish frames of this. Okay, beautiful. So the rocks drop down and they settle, which is exactly what we want. We now have a nice base to do our second sim on. The reason I did it this way with two separate sims, this first one here to just get the rocks to like settle on the floor. And then a second one to have the actual swirling movements. It's because I found that it's more practical for me. Because if you do it all in one sim, you have to wait. You have to like, sim for like 30-ish frames until the rock settle. And then you can start your movements, which is annoying because when you're like tweaking the sim and trying to find the right settings for the noise, the movement and everything. It means every time you have to wait 30 frames before it actually starts swimming. And just very annoying. So I like to do one pass here just to get the rocks to settle in a realistic way, right, with the collisions and everything. And then you animate or you do your sim with the forces on top of that. All right, cool. So now I actually were going to have to redo this because for the output attributes, I just want ID. That's it. So that's actually, oh, it keeps it cool. I don't need to resim. Excellent. So now what I want to do is grab one frame out of this simulation. I'm going to go frame 25, then drop a time shift. And if I do control shift, left click right here. It removes the expression that was in there. And so now we're always at frame 25, no matter what. So next what I want to do to prepare for the second sim is remove the points in the shape of a smiley face, as you saw in the intro. So for the smiley face, I'm just going to copy what I did from my other file because I mean, it's not really important, right? Just just me this. This video isn't about this part. You're going to put whatever geo you want as a collider. And if we preview our sim, you can see it's nice in the center. It's good to me. So let's add a group node. Second input, we're going to want our smiley face. And then we can do a keep inbounding regions. Make sure it's set to points for the group and select the bounding object. We now have a group of every point which is within that smiley face, which we can just blast away. And what the hell? I forgot something very important. And our second copy of points here, we want to make sure that we pack and instance because for our BD sims, it's always better to have packed geometry. In fact, I thought that you had to have packed geometry, but I guess not. Alright, let's rerun the sim till frame 25. There we go. And now when I blast away points, it gets rid of the entire rock. And not just part of it. Cool. The reason we need the ID attribute here is because we're going to be doing some re-timing later, which uses the ID attribute. Alright, cool. So now this is ready for our second bullet sim. Just real quick, what I want to do is prepare the collider for the second one. We're going to want our box and our smiley face. So let's just merge those together. And there we go. Let's copy this over here. Change the inputs. And, oops, for this one, we're going to want 10 substeps in order to be able to slow down our sim timestamp. Right. So to set up the forces to have the vortex effects, let's dive in here and add a pop axis force, which is going to be the main swirling effect. I'm going to copy the settings I found from my previous sim, which were for the shape. Let's make it really big. And then five and two here. We do have a little bit of suction as well, just so the rocks don't go flying outwards and like get pushed to the edges of our box. So that's it for the axis force. We also have a pop wind. Just have some random noise in there. Let's change the amplitude to 2.5. Squirrel scale was 0.5. The length was way down about there and roughness up. Okay. And finally, actually, let me show you what happens if we sim this for a bit. So as you can see, we've got the movement we want, but what I don't like is that some rocks go flying up way far. So I'm sure you could just tweak the forces until you get something that's not as crazy. But one like kind of hack to get around that is by adding a geo wrangling here. And if we do the at target V dot Y equals zero. So this is going to force the velocity on the Y axis to be zero. And so we don't get as much upward movement. Or in fact, not at all, I think should be. And if you look here, you can see, actually still do get a little bit, but really not as much. Which is great. All right. Let's sim this for real. I'm going to cache it. Make sure we have 10 sub steps. And I'm going to do 25 frames. Okay. And the sims done took about five minutes. Let's have a look at it. Okay. Pretty nice. We've got the movement we want. As you can see, it's swirling nicely. We've got just a little bit of movement in the middle. And the points aren't like being ejected outwards too much. So first thing to fix, you can see that some rocks do find their way inside the smiley face here. So instead of like tweaking the sim and everything, I'm just going to do a like very basic solution. Which is going to be copying our two notes here. Paste them here and boom. We just want any point gets inside of that geo. We blast it. Which isn't the best solution because it does mean you have some points that disappear like this one right here. But it was good enough for my case. Okay. So what we want to do next is going to be slowing down this whole sim. Let's do a re-time. Change the speed to 0.1. Output frame range. Well, input frame range is going to be 25. And output is going to be 250. If my math is correct. Let's have a look. Very nice. Everything works. Okay, cool. Next thing I want to do is remove the first 50 frames. Because when it starts, you can see it's very like squareish and all the points are nice and flat. And then as it goes, then we get more kind of noise in the sim. Which means that if you start here, you can see that it starts clean and then you get some nice randomness. So yeah, I just want to get rid of the beginning with a time shift. And let's do $F plus 49. And now we start frame 15. Beautiful. Okay, so now I've got this, but it's very slow and very linear. So what I want to do is use a ramp for the time. So let's re-time it. Let's do by frame. And I'm just going to copy the settings I had. Which is frame one. Let's remove this expression and add a keyframe. Frame 25. Let's go with 50 here. Frame 25 is going to be frame 96. And then frame 50 is going to be frame 192. Let's see if that works. It does not. Okay. Oh, I believe it's because I need this to be 250. Yeah, there we go. Okay, so if, wait. Yeah, okay. If my input frame range is 250, like from 1 to 250. But this right here, the global animation and frame isn't as big as 250, then it won't work. So that's why it didn't work. Okay, now I just want to actually let's have a look at how it looks now. Do a quick little flip book. Okay, so it doesn't look good. What I want is for it to start really fast and then slow down in the middle and then accelerate again at the end. One, because it just looks cool and two, because that's going to allow us to do a nice little transition when we have the two shots. As you saw in the intro. So I'm going to tweak my keyframes here. Let's grab this one and put it all the way up and do the same thing for this one. All right. And then for this one, oops, I'm going to press R to keep the acceleration ratio. So both handles move at the same time. Let's do something like this. Okay, let's have a look at this. There we go. That's what we want. But it starts fast, slows down and then accelerates again at the end. Cool. So now we're done with the same, but we still have our low poly proxy on it. So how do we get our high poly back onto it? One way I found is something I found a while ago on Reddit. I think or some forum. So shut out to the person who showed me this trick. What we can do is add delete geometry, it keeps the points. We only want the points. And then we do an attribute wrangle. And here we do four at transform. And then add P equals zero. Whoops. There we go. So this puts all our points in the center because we set up equals zero. And now we delete the points. And delete the transform attribute. And then we do a copy to points. And here we want our high poly, which is a bit of a problem. And then we do a copy to points. And here we want our high poly, and here we want our high poly geo. Bring it down. Hey, I crashed. Okay, we're back. So we do the add, then we do the geo wrangle, then we delete the transform attribute, and then copy to points with the high poly input here, which obviously is going to be a ton of polygons. And then we do the back of instance. And then, so we've got our scattered geo. Let me change this to have more polys. Okay, that didn't do much. 300. All right, whatever. So we've got our high poly scattered, but it's not moving. We need to be the movement. We need a transform pieces. Second input is going to be our points here. All right. And boom, just like that. And if we template our localy version, you can see that it matches. Cool. So the next thing I did is just added a random color per piece and invert that scale-up operation we did at the beginning. And that's it. Now my scene is very laggy because I've got a ton of geometry. But yeah, let's go over the shading real quick. So I'm just using the maps from Megascans for everything, except for the diffuse, where I brought in my CD, did a bit of a ramp, give it a slightly like beige to white colors, and did a color composite with multiply. Just to add some randomness, we don't really need to do this. All right. So the first light is an HRI, which acts as a fill. You can see it's set pretty low, just to kind of fill in the shadows, so we don't have too much contrast. And then I've got this light coming in from the top right, which is kind of my key. And already, I think this looks pretty good in terms of lighting. And then I've got a third light, which is located right under the smiley face, coming up through the floor, just to give a nice rim light on the edges here. All right. And that's it for the tutorial. I hope it was helpful. Hope you learned something. If you have any questions, drop a comment, and I'll do my best to answer it. Thanks for watching, and see you next time. Bye.

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\grain-vortex-in-houdini-tutorial\frame_000.jpg


---

## Structured Notes

### Core Technique
A two-stage RBD Bullet sim of rock proxies — first a settle/drop sim, then a second Bullet sim with vortex POP forces (Axis + Wind) — re-timed with a non-linear speed ramp for a slow-mo swirling-rocks shot, finished by transferring the simulated motion back onto high-poly Megascans geometry via a transform-points trick.

### Summary
Scatters a Megascans rock (reduced to a ~100-face/50-point low-poly proxy for sim performance, high-poly kept separately via a Null for final render) onto 10,000 points scattered inside a box volume (Scatter on an ISO-Offset volume), randomizing per-instance orientation with a MOPs Randomize node. De-intersects the scattered copies using a Boolean (Detect operation) to flag intersecting polygons, then iteratively uses Proximity Blast / nearest-point deletion (repeating the check-and-delete pass until no intersecting geometry remains) before re-running Copy to Points. Builds a box collider (Peak to extend it outward past the scattered points' actual bounds, top face removed, Poly Extrude for thickness) and scales the whole scene up 5x before simulating (RBD sims are cheaper/more accurate at larger physical scale). **Sim 1 (settle):** Bullet Solver, 5 substeps, tuned Collision Padding (lowered to ~0.002 to match the visualized collision shape to the actual mesh) and Collision Shape set to Concave (not the default Convex Hull) for the box collider — settles ~30 frames of rocks falling and resting under gravity/collision only. Splitting settle and swirl into two separate sims (rather than one long sim) avoids having to wait through the settle phase every time you tweak swirl-force parameters. **Sim 2 (vortex):** grabs frame 25 of the settled sim via a frozen Time Shift, removes points inside a custom "smiley face" collider shape (Group + Keep Bounding Region on points, then Blast) to carve out a hole in the rock field, re-packs as packed instances (required/preferred for Bullet), adds a merged Box+Smiley collider, 10 substeps, and two POP forces: **POP Axis Force** (the main swirl, large radius, with some inward suction so rocks don't fly to the box edges) and **POP Wind** (amplitude ~2.5, scale 0.5, low length, higher roughness, for turbulent variation) — plus an Attribute Wrangle zeroing `v.y` each step to suppress excessive upward ejection without having to perfectly hand-tune the force values. After simulating (~25 frames cached), points that drifted back inside the smiley-face hole are cleaned up with the same group+blast trick used to carve the hole originally (accepting that a few points simply vanish as the simplest fix). **Re-timing for slow-mo:** a Re-Time SOP stretches frames 1–25 to output frames 1–250 (10x slowdown), a Time Shift trims the clean opening 50 frames (`$F + 49`) so the shot starts mid-turbulence rather than on the flat initial state, and a second Re-Time set to "By Frame" with custom keyframes (and handles set to maintain equal acceleration via the R hotkey) creates a fast-slow-fast S-curve speed ramp for a more dynamic, transition-friendly motion feel. **High-poly swap:** Delete Geometry (keep Points only) → Attribute Wrangle setting `@transform` rows' translation to (0,0,0)/identity (effectively centering each packed point's transform) → delete the now-unneeded transform attribute → Copy to Points with the high-poly geometry as the source → Transform Pieces (second input = the original simulated low-poly points) to apply the captured motion/orientation onto the high-poly copies. Finishes with per-piece random color, undoing the earlier 5x scale-up, Megascans PBR shading (custom diffuse ramp + Color Composite Multiply for tonal variation) and a 3-light setup: a dim fill HDRI, a key light from upper-right, and an uplight beneath the smiley-face cutout for rim lighting.

### Key Steps
1. Import/Match Size a Megascans rock; strip unneeded attributes (keep Position/Normal/UV); keep a Null with the high-poly version, and a Poly Reduce (~0.01% keep, down to ~100 faces) for the low-poly sim proxy.
2. Box → ISO Offset (volume) → Scatter (10,000 points) → Copy to Points (low-poly rock) → MOPs Randomize (orientation).
3. De-intersect: Boolean (Detect) → Blast non-selected (keep only intersecting polys) → find nearest scatter point to that geometry → delete those points → re-run Copy to Points; repeat the check (duplicate the detect/blast chain) until no intersecting geometry remains; Proximity-based search-radius blast can speed up bulk removal before the precise per-point pass.
4. Build the box collider: extend bounds past the actual scattered point cloud with Peak, delete the top face (Blast the prim), Poly Extrude for wall thickness (output back face).
5. Scale entire scattered geo + collider up 5x for cheaper/more accurate Bullet sim behavior.
6. **Sim 1:** Bullet Solver (5 substeps) on the scattered rocks vs. the box collider; lower Collision Padding (~0.002) and set the collider's Collision Shape to Concave to match visualized collision geometry to the actual mesh; cache ~30 frames to let rocks settle.
7. Trim sim output to just the ID attribute; freeze frame 25 with a Time Shift (Ctrl+Shift-click to clear its frame expression).
8. Carve the smiley-face hole: Group (second input = smiley collider) → Keep points inside that Bounding Region → Blast; ensure the rock copies are Packed Instances (Pack and Instance toggle on Copy to Points) so a deleted point removes the whole rock, not a sub-piece.
9. **Sim 2:** merge Box + Smiley colliders; Bullet Solver, 10 substeps; add POP Axis Force (large radius, suction inward) for the swirl, POP Wind (amplitude 2.5, scale 0.5, low length, higher roughness) for turbulence, and an Attribute Wrangle (`v.y = 0;` or similar) to suppress excessive upward launch; cache ~25 frames.
10. Clean stray points that re-entered the smiley-face hole using the same Group+Blast pattern from step 8.
11. Re-Time SOP: Speed 0.1 (or explicit Input range 1–25 → Output range 1–250) for a 10x slowdown.
12. Time Shift `$F + 49` to skip the clean/flat opening frames and start on already-turbulent motion.
13. Second Re-Time set to "By Frame" with manual keyframes (e.g. frame 1→1, 25→96, 50→192 when working in the now-250-frame range) and equal-acceleration handles (press R) for a fast-slow-fast non-linear speed ramp.
14. High-poly transfer: Delete Geometry (Points only) → Attribute Wrangle zeroing each point's `@transform` translation (centers it) → delete the `transform` attribute → Copy to Points (high-poly geo) → Transform Pieces (second input: the original low-poly simulated points) to reapply the real per-instance motion onto the high-poly copies.
15. Finishing: random color per piece, invert the earlier 5x scale-up, custom diffuse ramp + Color Composite (Multiply) over Megascans PBR maps, 3-point lighting (dim fill HDRI, upper-right key, beneath-floor rim/uplight through the smiley cutout).

### Houdini Nodes / VEX / Settings
Match Size, Poly Reduce, Box, ISO Offset, Scatter, Copy to Points (Pack and Instance), MOPs Randomize, Boolean (Detect), Blast, Proximity-based nearest-point search, Peak, Poly Extrude, Bullet Solver (Sub Steps, Collision Padding, Collision Shape: Concave vs. Convex Hull), Time Shift (frozen frame via cleared expression, `$F + N` offset), Group (Keep Bounding Region, points domain), POP Axis Force, POP Wind, Attribute Wrangle (`v.y = 0`, `@transform` zeroing), Re-Time SOP (Speed mode and By-Frame keyframe mode), Delete Geometry (Points only), Transform Pieces, Color Composite (Multiply). VEX: `@transform`, `v.y`.

### Difficulty
Advanced — combines RBD/Bullet simulation tuning, procedural de-intersection, packed-instance workflows, and non-linear re-timing; assumes prior Houdini SOP/DOP fluency.

### Houdini Version
Not specified.

### Tags
"dop", "sop", "rbd", "simulation", "procedural", "advanced"

---

## Related Tutorials
- `houdini-tutorial---simple-disintegration-fx.md` and other RBD-focused entries — shares Bullet/RBD simulation territory
- `mops-motion-operators-for-houdini-part-1.md`, `mops-motion-operators-for-houdini-part-2.md`, `mops-motion-operators-for-houdini-part-3.md` — shares MOPs node usage (Randomize)
