---
title: Guest Tutorial: Creating realistic honey with FLIP
source: YouTube
url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5oHU1bmYKs0
author: Entagma
ingested: 2026-07-01
houdini_version: "[PENDING]"
tags: []
extraction_status: pending
frames_dir: tutorials/frames/guest-tutorial-creating-realistic-honey-with-flip/
frame_count: 4
---

# Guest Tutorial: Creating realistic honey with FLIP

**Source:** [YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5oHU1bmYKs0)
**Author:** Entagma
**Duration:** 29m49s | 4 section(s)

---

## Raw Data (for Claude Code extraction)


### Intro [0:00]
**Transcript:** We finally have another guest tutorial.  This time from Philip Danger.  Philip is an alumni from Nuremberg Polytechnic University where we are teaching and he's  a bit of a flipp genius.  I'm sure you'll agree after watching this video.  And if you don't want to deal with Fluid Sims yourself, he's also available for freelance  work.  Links are in the description.  Speaking of freelance, the one reason we're able to hire him for this video is his support  that we're getting from you guys on Patreon.  There's a new Valem course there.  Go check it out.  Hello.  My name is Philip and today we're diving into something most of us have probably tried  at least once in our CG journey, honey simulation.  This tutorial we focus on the technical setup, especially the viscous behavior of our  honey.  To achieve that, we will build a custom stick on collision force and greatly customize  the fluid viscosity to fit our needs.  With our simulation done, we will make use of older tutorials by Tom Taylor and Alvaro  Mereira to add bubble star simulation and mesh everything in a smooth way.  In the end, I will quickly go over my rendering setup and octane and explain how it was influenced  by the reference footage I picked out in the beginning.  Something that will not be covered here are the stretchy bubbles present in the final  rendering.  If the demand is high enough, we will make a part 2 where I show you an easy way to simply  add stretchy and deforming bubbles to any existing viscous flip simulation.  When looking at reference footage, it's easy for us to pick out some key characteristics  that make honey actually look like honey.  The first one is the weight.  Honey is about 40% denser than water, which greatly influences how it interacts with collision  objects.  You can see whenever the honey hits the spoon, it dips down a bit and then resists back  up and pushes against the honey.  Obviously it's a very viscous fluid, which results in this stacking and layering behavior  when the honey pours on top of the spoon.  It folds back and forth on top of itself.  Additionally, something you can spot here is that the honey coats the spoon very evenly.  It is very sticky, but it still slides on top of it and it doesn't bulge up too big.  So it's like a thin coating that also drips down.  Something else I realized while looking at reference footage was that honey has a lot  of trapped air inside, which doesn't form perfectly spherical bubbles, instead in the  beginning if you look closely, the bubbles deform with the movement of the honey.  So that's probably also something we want to recreate when we actually want to animate  honey.  Another thing I like to do when working with reference footage and preparing a setup  is looking at things I don't want to recreate.  It's the tend to look similar to what I want to create, so I can better keep in mind  that I should somehow distance myself from this.  This could, for example, in this case be maple syrup, which is way more runny than honey.  It doesn't look that sticky, it looks more watery, and the tricky part is it's often  used like in the same context, like sweet acid type of thing.  So we should really keep in mind to, for example, not make our honey too runny, and also  we should probably nail the color because when looking at the maple syrup it doesn't  seem that golden glowing as honey does.  So this will also influence our setup later on.

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\guest-tutorial-creating-realistic-honey-with-flip\frame_000.jpg

### Starting Setup [3:30]
**Transcript:** So let's just dive into Houdini and go through the checklist we basically just created.  I already got a scene prepared here, and the first thing we want to take care of is the  feeling of weight that the honey should have.  And this is greatly influenced by how the honey interacts with its surroundings.  In this case the wooden honey depends on.  I animated it in a way where it slowly rises up and looks like it gets hit by something  mid-air and then continues rising up and resisting against it.  That's a choice I made that has nothing to do with the simulation itself, but it greatly  influences how we see the simulation later on and really sets the feeling of weight we  want the honey to have.  It's just a mesh I got from Sketchfab, you can find a link down below.  And here I got a service representation of the mesh and also a VDB for collision detection  in our flip simulation.  And it's also important that our mesh should have a velocity attribute on the points, which  is needed for the collision detection by flip to be basically more accurate.  In a separate geocontainer I already prepared the sourcing of a flip simulation.  It's basically just a sphere that's animated in a way where it will look like honey is being  squeezed out of a bottle out of frame and slowly drips on top of the wooden spoon.  I use a flip source for that.  And I also have some downwards velocity added to that.  So it looks like the honey is coming from further up when we look through the camera.  Inside the top network I have here, I have a base flip simulation prepared where we use  a volume source to source our flip particles, a static object for our collision.  And in my flip solver I changed some settings that better fit the scene here.  I added an ID attribute and an H attribute to the particles.  For the collision detection I changed it to move outside collision.  I changed my receding values to better fit the small scale scene here.  And for volume motion I obviously enabled the viscosity and also the viscosity by attribute  because that's the next thing we're going to do is changing the viscosity basically  per particle.  The velocity transfer is changed to APIC to the swirly kernel.  Additionally I turned on the surface tension and the value of 50 was sufficient for this  scene and the scene scale.  And to better fit the animation I have with my honey dipper, the simulation only starts  at frame 26.

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\guest-tutorial-creating-realistic-honey-with-flip\frame_001.jpg

### Viscosity [6:18]
**Transcript:** The next thing after the feeling of weight that the honey should have, which we already  took care of.  I want to work on the viscosity.  And as you can see here the viscosity can be a bit tricky because if it's set to low  the movement along the spoon looks nice but the honey seems way too runny and as I said  early on in the beginning we want to avoid the honey being too runny because it tends to  look more like syrup when it's too thin.  In the other example you can see here when it's too thick the honey is almost too static.  It bulges up too high, it doesn't slide down and coat the spoon nicely.  So we need to find another solution.  As you saw in the example footage I just showed when the viscosity was high out the folding  we want to have here where the stream of honey pours on the rest of it.  The folding was very nice but the movement was not as nice and when the viscosity was  lower the movement on the spoon was nicer but there was almost no folding behavior of  the stream of honey.  So we can use this observation to our advantage and basically increase the honey's viscosity  wherever it is faster because it is the fastest before it hits something else and with the  increased viscosity in this region by using its velocity the honey will still fold nicely  on top of itself and when it starts to slow down it basically becomes more runny and still  slides down the spoon nicely and we can do that by diving in our top network and dropping  down a hop ringer.  There is a very similar technique to what Mo used in his melting things with flip tutorial  as we are going to use an already existing attribute on the flip particles to remap  their viscosity.  So let's just create a variable called Vell which is going to be the velocity of our  particle where we also want to get basically the amplitude of the velocity so the speed.  And we want to remap the speed value in a way where basically whenever the speed is high  we want to get a high result and wherever the speed is low we want to get a kind of lower  result in our value.  Now we want to take this speed value and remap it so we can use it to influence our viscosity  and we do that by using a channel ramp we just call follow for something like that and  take our speed value.  To make full use of the channel ramp we first have to get the speed values in a range  from 0 to 1 using a fit function and what worked for me here was take input values between  0 and 2 and match them to values between 0 and 1.  And now we can just write this to our viscosity attribute per particle where we take the speed  remap value which is going to be between 0 and 1 and multiply it by some base viscosity  value in this case 2000 worked fine for me.  The ramp I used was kind of an almost exponential growth first I changed interpolation to be  spline at another point in here and here position is going to be 0.5 and the value is 0.1.  And also the leftmost value is still set to 0.1 so we still have some viscosity left  and don't go too low with our particle viscosity.  I have a small typo in here.  Okay now we can look at how the simulation looks like right now.  That basically looks perfect exactly how we wanted to behave.  The honey doesn't completely stop when conliding with the spoon it stays running down it's  still like slight stone but it still folds nicely on top of each other when the stream hits  the rest of the honey.  Something additional we can do to further improve the look and the complexity of our simulation  is changing the per particle viscosity before it even goes into our top network.  So we can go back on top level drop down a point warp and in here we need an anti-aliased  noise where we take in the position and the time value for the offset and leave everything  as is we just decrease the max octaves to 3 so the noise becomes more uniform.  Next we get our values in a more usable range and what worked nicely for me here was taking  in values of minus 0.1 and 0.5 and remapping it to a range of 0 and 1.  We can write this as a color value to better see what we are doing here but we also need  to create a new attribute I called viscosity factor or visc factor where basically we take  this normalized value from our noise and remap it and make it usable to use in our  top network and what worked for me was remapping the values from 0 and 1 to a range of 604,000  and we need to change our code a little bit in here by basically not multiplying our  remap values with static value instead we want to multiply it with our viscosity factor and that  just results in our simulation having a little bit more variation in its viscosity and when I  let it run for a little bit here you can see that the different viscosity levels that we pre-define  tend to behave similarly which results in little sheets of honey with different  visc entities that slide on top of each other which even enhance the slayering behavior and can  also be used later on for shading if we want to okay with our viscosity basically nail down the

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\guest-tutorial-creating-realistic-honey-with-flip\frame_002.jpg

### Stickiness [12:48]
**Transcript:** next thing I want to talk about is the stickiness of our honey the collision behavior basically as  you may know even though flip is partly particle based it does its velocity and incompressibility  calculations on a background grid so there's this volume where for every cell there is a velocity  value stored inside of the cell so the vanilla stick on collision behavior that's available in the  flip solver is pretty simple it basically just blends the values of the collision velocity and  fluid velocity based on the distance to the collision so the closer the fluid is to the collision  object the more the velocity gets blended into the collision objects velocity which means when the  collision object is static the velocity basically just decreases or when the collision object moves  upwards the arrows here slowly also turn upwards so that's basically physically correct but due to  numerical dissipation it doesn't always yield satisfying results it feels like the fluid is always  lagging behind a bit with the collision object so for this case we are going to create our own stick  on collision behavior and this is going to work in the following way so we take a look at the random cell  we take a look at what the stored velocity is and take a step in the direction of the velocity  we end up at a new position from this new position we're going to look where the closest point  to our collision geometry is going to be then we basically just look up the vector from the  original position to this projected collision position and we can use this new vector to add to our  cell's velocity what this basically does and the key difference to this vanilla stick on collision  behavior is that we actually add velocity towards the collision object it's almost like an attraction  force and not a stick force which obviously is not physically correct but it results in our honey  not stopping completely at the collision instead it continues to wrap around it very nicely it just  coats the collision object in a way that looks and feels very natural and still keeps the dynamic  behavior the movement of the liquid we want to have that's like a thin line we are walking here  because we have a thick slow moving liquid but we don't want it to become too static and too slow  moving and that was just a way that ended up working for honey so back in Houdini we can dive back  into our top network and use a gas filter angle plugged into the volume velocity input of our flip  in here we will make use of the xyz distance and prim uv functions that have been covered  extensively on this channel so I won't go into detail first we need to create our prim  number and prim uv variables and next is the first step we just talked about and that is  taking our original position and taking a step according to the cell's velocity I'm going to  call this step pause and we take our position and add our velocity times our time increment  additionally I want to create two sliders max this slider and a factor slider we're going to use  multiply a layer on now we want to get the distance of our current cell to the collision object  for this we should probably first change our input in here we take the input 2 in here we want  top data and the stop data is going to be the geometry of our collision object so basically the  surface mesh now for every cell in our velocity grid we want to look up the distance  to the nearest collision point we do that using the xyz distance function the geometry we want to  look up is our collision geometry so input 1 we want to do this from our step position and not  from our original cell position we want to write the prim number to our prim number variable and  the prim uv to our prim uv variable and the maximum distance is controlled by our max this slider  for me the maximum distance that worked here was 0.15 next I want to look up the resulting  position on our collision geometry which I'm going to call a prim p there we use the prim uv  function where we want to look up the p attribute our prim num and using our prim uv values now we  need to create a vector between our original cells position and our goal position on our collision  object and the last the last thing I want to do before we bring everything together is remapping  our cell distance to the collision geometry so we can better control the fall off that it's not linear  so I create a channel ramp here called fall off in there I fit our dist value from our value of 0 and  the max dist we chose earlier to a value of 0 and 1 and here I changed the ramp so that it first  is flipped again I want b spline interpolation and add an additional value at a position point 1  and value point 1 what this basically does is it acts as a multiplier where the closer our cell  is to the collision object the greater the influence of this added velocity is going to be and the  further away our cell is going to be from the collision object the less velocity will be added to our  cell and when it's exactly at the maximum distance or greater there will be no velocity added and  the fluid will behave as if there was no sticking force at all so we can bring everything together now  by adding our values to our velocity grid first we want to take this offset vector pointing from  our cells position to the projected hit position when I multiply this by our remap value so basically by  the distance to our collision object and multiply this by our factor which is just a scale on the  magnitude of this vector and the factor value I ended up using was 15 and that's exactly what we  want we have our nice sticking behavior where our honey coats the spoon very nicely in the end we  have our adaptive viscosity which results in nice movement of the honey but also the nice layering  behavior we want our honey to have and that's basically all there is to it regarding our honey movement  now we can increase our simulations resolution my final simulation had a part acceleration of 0  0 0 5 and we can drop down our file cache and cache out our simulation if you want to you can  use a fluid compress here I disabled the cool bandwidth of course set the particle separation to  my actual value I disabled the call bandwidth because I want to keep the particles every cell to be  able to add bubbles and for attributes you can leave everything as is if you want to you can  for example add the cd attribute and the idea is already in here you should also add the age  attribute which we will need later on if we actually want to add the stretcher bubbles I already  prepared a file cache here which we can now post process to actually mesh and add our bubbles to  the simulation and we do that by just taking advantage of some other guest tutorials that actually  exist the first one is the meshing small scale flip sims tutorial by Alvaro Moreira and where we  just copy over his setup and I basically left everything as is I changed my voxel size and stuff like  this accordingly and also increased the iterations of some on some of the vdbg's moving notes and  something I also did in my final simulation was further blurring the velocity attribute because  not during the velocity attribute in this case led to some artifacts that resulted with the  velocity values and the motion blur and this just yielded a nice result next part we want to copy  over is from the adding bubbles to your flip simulation tutorial by Tom Taylor where he very  nicely explained how to add bubbles to your flips sim and it even works with receding here I just  adjusted my piececare values to better fit my c size change this ramp here a little bit so that  I have more little bubbles and less bigger bubbles and I greatly reduced the threshold for the amount  of bubbles that are gonna be here we let this run for a bit now we just have to merge this into one  geometry stream and add our material accordingly which are also already prepared this is the honey  material in here and to keep everything clean and tidy grab a null and call it out honey and for  the bubbles here to actually get our desired effect it's important to flip the normals on our sphere  so our rendering engine of choice basically treats the sphere like air pockets that are trapped inside  of our fluid it just makes the refraction and refraction calculations accurate in this case looking  through our cam and I think I want to work on this frame or maybe no frame 90 looks good because  the folding here it's a bit nicer next what I want to add is an action backdrop just use a grid for  this parent it to the camera so I can make sure it's always perpendicular to the camera I offset it  a bit and rotated it accordingly and let's just fire up the IPR okay as you can see with our  lights deactivated we still have some light happening in here that's because I use certain  hderi but I didn't use it as like an regular texture environment I used it as a backplate texture  I did that so that I can turn on reflections and reflections but I don't have any diffuse lighting  from the hderi so I can make the reflections and reflections more interesting and it's always what  you want to focus on with transparent or translucent objects you want to light everything around it  is actually not the object itself because reflection refraction those are just things that show the  surroundings of an object and not really the object itself I also have four different light sources  in my scene the first one is a background light that illuminates the grid the backdrop and also  gives some nice yeah room lighting effect here I have a key light that's shining from the top left  on top of the honey already looks pretty nice very golden very warm sweet I also added a rim light  here that enhances the silhouette of our honey but also of our wooden honey de perspoon and if we  fold up a bit here the light from the back is a very nice look at the edge here illuminates the  honey from the back there's some glow coming from inside of the honey which otherwise would not be  there there would be a lot lost here additionally because the stream down here looks a bit dark  sad I added another backlight that's just pointing at this for the lights as I just said to get  more interesting reflections I used some image textures that just represent some studio light to  get more interesting results otherwise those reflections you see here would look way more flat  and yeah fake that's also a detail that greatly enhances our final rendering also has nothing to do  with our honey itself talking about the honey let's check out the material I created here it's  very very simple it's just a specular material with some low roughness and fake shadows turned on  that's important because fake shadows turned off results and very very dark spots  takes a lot of samples to actually brighten up and get rid of the noise so we can use fake shadows  here I control everything via our RGB color node and some of the color of the honey comes from  scattering inside of the honey and some comes from actual transmission the pure transmission  looks like this so it's just some slides like old blue color I basically take this RGB value  I decided on and just desaturated and making it brighter by using the gamma control and then I  combined it with this scattering medium a nice trick for working with mediums in octane is yeah  combining a medium with a specular material you don't really see what the medium itself does  because so much is happening with reflections and reflections so if you want to check out just what  the medium does is you can pipe it inside of a null material and you basically just get the  scattering effect isolated you can dial in your values very nice between that this case the density  the volumes that percentage the amount of scattering and my unissotropy values and combined  this gives this result which in my opinion very nice very much like honey and we really like  and like how the color turned out that it gets even like pretty red inside the dark areas which  gives it that really dark warm glowing effect a lot of bath the spoon material is pretty complicated  it's based on a video fellow youtuber new plastic did great resource for octane materials if you  want to dive into this kind of stuff and it's basically a wood shader that's based on a  OSL script that creates a very nice wood grain texture that is able to honey here you can see that  that the wood looks great polished very natural very clean I just like the look a lot yeah that's  basically all for now I hope you had some great insights on this production setup and yeah just  to recap I think the key takeaways are that no matter what tools and who denigives you you should  always customize them to your needs and I think for me like the most important takeaway you should  have from this video is that you should always see the big picture so if you want to simulate honey  if you want to animate some honey you shouldn't just focus on the honey itself we should focus on the  surroundings itself how the light works how the background works how the composition is  chose what objects the honey interacts with how the other objects around the honey are animated  because all of these choices greatly influence the look of the honey even though they don't have  anything to do with the honey itself so thank you for listening thank you for following a long  big thanks to Manu Mo and Chris for having me and as mentioned earlier if you want to see on how  you can add scratchy bubbles to this already existing simulation even without having to  resimulate everything again drop a comment down below I'm happy to record a part two for you guys  so have a nice day and bye bye  I hope you all enjoyed this tutorial again big thanks going out to all our patrons for making  videos like this possible thanks guys

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\guest-tutorial-creating-realistic-honey-with-flip\frame_003.jpg


---

## Structured Notes

### Core Technique
[PENDING EXTRACTION]

### Summary
[PENDING EXTRACTION]

### Key Steps
[PENDING EXTRACTION]

### Houdini Nodes / VEX / Settings
[PENDING EXTRACTION]

### Difficulty
[PENDING EXTRACTION]

### Houdini Version
[PENDING EXTRACTION]

### Tags
[PENDING EXTRACTION]

---

## Related Tutorials
[PENDING EXTRACTION]
