---
title: Houdini Tutorial - Simple Disintegration FX
source: YouTube
url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=O2F1Qzl22oU
author: Voxyde VFX
ingested: 2026-06-23
houdini_version: "Houdini 19/20"
tags: [vops, disintegration, mask, noise, particles, vfx, intermediate]
extraction_status: complete
frames_dir: tutorials/frames/houdini-tutorial---simple-disintegration-fx/
frame_count: 4
---

# Houdini Tutorial - Simple Disintegration FX

**Source:** [YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=O2F1Qzl22oU)
**Author:** Voxyde VFX
**Duration:** 21m33s | 1 section(s)

---

## Raw Data (for Claude Code extraction)


### Full Content [0:00]
**Transcript:** Hey guys, I'm Malel Toby, you'll probably see me around on Boxer.com a bit more and on the YouTube channel. I've been asked by a few people to share how I made the disintegration effect that I did on the breakdown. It is actually a quite simple effect and I've been asked a couple of times on both our Discord channel and on LinkedIn. So I thought I'll instead of just sharing the hip file, I'll just walk you through how I did that. So I'm in Houdini and let's create a geometry node and I've been and I'll just put down a test geometry in here. Let's use the squab, display it in here and let's just quickly take a look at the geometry. It's fairly low resolution. You can actually increase it here as well, I think. No, not all this one. I'll remove the shader, we don't need that. And we need to sub-divide this so we have kind of an equal amount of subdivisions everywhere. So we'll just remesh it so we have triangles that are equal in size everywhere. Let's add the remesh, display it and let's increase the resolution in here by lowering this target size to say something like 0.001 to begin with. And I'll just increase this moving in here and the iterations to 10 to say it's a bit smoother. And then I'll remove the recompute the normals. Great, that's a good start so I'll just move the wireframe in here and let's look at the geometry we have now. So we'll need to create a mask based on whatever we want, mask out over time and we need to animate it. On the throne steps that I did, I did it from the middle and out so we can build something like that but you can also just build a simple mask by, for example, the adjust. I just float the attribution here. I can just give you an example, for example, display this and let's call this mask. And if I change this to say something like bounding box and I'll display the attribution here. We can see it and let's go to the Z axis and as you can see we can have a mask based on the Z axis in here that we can animate to grow based on time. We can either do something in here in the min and max values or we can animate the ramp in here or the bound min and max in here and so on. But I'm not going to do that. I will do the one from the middle and out. So let's add a point for and let's call this mask and I'll display it and let's dive inside and let's look at our nodes in here. And what I want to do first is just get the distance from the middle of the geometry and out. Previously I think there was a centroid node. There is no centroid node anymore. So I'll use a point, a bb box or bounding box. So this is basically the values of our bounding box for the geometry. I'll change the input in here to be the first input which is the one I connected in here. To get the centroid of the bounding box, we can just average the minimum and the maximum. So I put down an average and we can connect these two. And that's basically the middle point of the geometry. I can simply test that by adding a distance node and connect that to the position and the second one to the centroid of the geometry. And then we can put that to this color, the CD. And let's take a look. So if we fit this now and you can see you can grow that from the middle of the geometry and out. Obviously the middle of this geometry is somewhere around here as the bounding box goes further down, further down in here. So what we want to do instead is just get the Z axis and the X axis centroid of this object and we'll just ignore the Y axis that goes up. So let's get the Z and X values by just getting a, by using a vector to float to break this vector attribute, the position attribute. And we'll take the first one and the last one which is the X and Z. And I'll put them into a vector to, sorry, float to vector 2. So we're creating a vector 2 variable instead. Just like this. And we'll do the same thing with this centroid. So I'll just copy these two points and I'll put it, connect this in here to the centroid. And now when we do the distance between these two, just like this and like this, we'll get the centroid, get the distance from the, the center of the, the geometry in here. So now we can, as you can see, get it into the 2D plane. Now I want the mask to have a 0 to 1 export. So I'll keep the destination to be 0 to 1 in the fit in here. But I will change the min and max in here based on an animation I want to create. So I'll export this minimum as a promoted parameter. I'll just open it in here. Now just call this anem for animation. And I want this max to always be a certain value in front of the minimum. So what we can do is add an add constant in here. We can always add a value, let's just say something like 0.3 or 0.2. Let's give that 0.3. And connect that to the maximum. So this maximum will always be 0.3 above the minimum. So if we go back to the Vop node in here and we can look at the anim parameter, we can animate it and we can have it move forward to kind of ease into the geometry. From the middle line. I'll keep this at, let's give that one just to see our mask. But as you can see the mask is quite linear and there is no variation in it at all. So let's just go inside back to the attribute Vop. And I want to add an noise here. So let's just drag the global values back. And I'll drag a line from the position in here and add a noise and add the turbulent noise. In here. And then I'll add a add node connected to the position line in here. And I'll connect this in the line. But I'll just change the noise type to sparse convolution and the signature to 3D noise. So we're affecting all of the axis in the position. So let's connect it in here. And right away you can see there's a shift and it's not as linear or straight as it was before. But the frequency of the noise is a bit too high right now so the noise is a bit too big. So we can just increase or increase the noise in here at the frequency. To get to a more detailed line in here. We may also want to reduce the amplitude because it's probably a bit too much. So let's keep that 0.5 maybe. And you can play around with the rest of the settings like the roughness and so on. So that's our mask setup. We just need to animate it. So I'll just go back up and I'll do an animation. So let's do from 0. And you can see at 0 it still has a spot that's a bit dark in the middle. So we should just go a bit below 0 in here just to get rid of this. I'll just go 0.5. This changes based on your settings. Just to start my animation. So I'll hold alt and press on this parameter to set the keyframe. And let's say we go to frame 72. And I'll increase this until it's covering the whole geometry. Make sure it doesn't go too far above that. Around 3. And I'll hold alt and press on the parameter to add another keyframe. Let's play this quickly. We can see this is growing. Great. Another we have this, we should continue with the next steps, which is to break off the region that's in dark in here. And take these primitives, the triangle in here, and break them from each other and scale them down in size based on the mask. So the first thing we want to do is just add a split point node, which will split these primitives. So each of these primitives in here is connected to other primitives. And they're sharing a point in the middle. So you want to split this point. So each of them have their own points and they can be moved separately. And we can do that with the split points, and this light is. And by default that splits everything. And I don't want to do that. I don't want to split everything. So I'm just going to add a group in here based on the mask we created. And we can do that by just going to the type in here, group type, and changing it to two points. And then writing an add to reference our mask. So it's right at mask, which is our attribute. And we'll do anything that's above 0.001. So now it's not, obviously we forgot to export the mask attribute. So let's go back to the mask in here. And let's remove this line to the color. And I'll just do a line from the fit and do buying the export. And I'll just write the mask in here to export this mask. And we have a visualizer here from before. I'll just right click on this visualizer in here and remove the mask. So now we middle click in here. You can see the point number is higher. And that reduces based on where in the timeline you are. As you can see, it's hard to see a difference in here. You can probably see a difference if you activate the point numbers. It's really dense in here. So it's really hard to see. If you play this around, you can see there's a change in numbers. Because when the permittance split from each other, you'll get more points. So let's deactivate this. And now that we have the region that's supposed to be masked is split. Now we can reduce that in size. So I'll just go below the split points in here. So in here and we'll add a point stop. And let's call this scale down frames displayed. And in here, it's quite a simple operation or it's a simple setup of nodes, but it's actually a complex operation in the background. As what we want to do is get the centroid of each of these triangles. To use as a pivot to scale them down with, so like this, based on their pivot in the middle. So to do transformations in WOP in here, the best way to do that is to use the make transform node, this one, which is a complete matrix of values. And in order to add that to our position, let's connect the position to the position in here. And to add this, we need to add a multiply. Connect that in here and connect this transform into it. And if you see here now, you can see that we can scale this whole up and down the whole geometry. But we want to do this based on each of these primitives and based on their pivot. If you zoom in here, you can see the make transform has a pivot input. So we can give it a vector position of the pivot for each of these primitives. And this is way to do that is to just drag a line from the primitive in here, because each point is connected to a primitive. And we know when we split them from each other, they only have one primitive. So we can just import that primitive, import primitive attribute and we'll import the position of that. And we need to do that for the input first input. That will be for each of these, let's say, a point in here, will give us the corresponding primitive, which is probably something like this. And this position is the center of this primitive, since we're using import primitive and not import position. So let's collect this result to the pivot in here. And now if we scale this down, just as a test, you can see they're scaling based on their positions or the centroid of the primitives. As you can see, I'll just put that back to one, one, one. We need to do that based on a mask in the mask we created. So I'll bind in or bring in that mask. So let's do a bind and we'll write a mask in here. And let's connect that to the scaling here. And this is really the wireframe. And let's look at this when we move it. As you can see, something's happening. So we're scaling down the regions, but they're coming back again. So what we need to do is just add a fit node in here after the mask. And we'll do the destination min to 1 and the max to 0. And I'll give us the opposite. And I will fix the problem. Now if you wanted the opposite of this, like we had before, you can go back to the mask in here. And you can switch this fit destination min and max from 1 to 0. And I will give you the opposite if you wanted this, just like this. I'll actually put this back to 0 and 1 in here. And the next thing I did is just add some interest to this. I added a position noise based on the mask. So let's just add another point up. And I'll just call this P noise based on mask. Display it and I'll go inside. And let's look at our nodes in here. Let's drag the P to the export P and let's add an add node as we're going to add some values to the position. And I'll drag a line from the position in here and add an anti-alase noise like this. Or you can use a turd noise if you want. But I'm going to go with this one. And I actually want this to change based on time. So I'll change this into a 4-dimensional vector by adding a vector to vector 4. This one. Connected in the middle in here. And I will make this CLO which means it's a 4-float vector. And the fourth value in here I want to add the time. So it changes based on time. And in the noise in here, I want to change the signature to be a 3D noise. And let's connect this to the add in here. And as you can see it changed everything. But I want to add a multiplier here after the noise. And I want to do this based on the mask. So let's just bring in bind in the mask. And let's write the mask in here. And it's connected in here. And let's take a quick look at this. See how it looked. So I think we just need to change the values in the noise. Let's go to the noise in here. And I'll increase the first three values in here as they represent the XYZ positions. Well the last one is the time multiplier. So let's just change this to something like 5555. And I'll probably reduce the amplitude in here to something like 0.5. And let's change the noise type to simplex. Now I think we have what we're looking for. So let's see in here. Yeah, as you can see it's working. You can play around with the noise and it's probably a bit too fast. It's changing a lot based on time. So we can just add a constant multiplier. Or we can simply just change the multiplier in here to something like 0.1. Yeah, that's nicer. I think that's the main elements in this effect release. But let's just go back up. Okay. And I'll increase the remission here to something like 0.0. So do 0.5. Just so the triangles become a bit smaller. Just going to take a bit more time. But let's wait for it. Just like this. And these triangles are a bit smaller. We can also, there's a few regions in here that are not made yet. We can just delete them just so we save space. And we can just add a blast noise displayed. And I'll change the group type to point. And I'll do at mask to get the mask attribute. And I'll do anything larger than 0.999. Something like that. And that deletes these regions. But that also gives us some floating points. It's hard to see. But if you zoom out, you can see the white points in here. And we can easily get rid of that by adding a clean display that. And I'll remove the remove degenerate permitives in here. And I'll just keep the remove a new point and remove null. And that's it. If I just do null, just write out effect. And I'll clean this up. That's it. I'll do a quick flipbook. Just like this, I think it's a bit too fast. The noise is a bit too fast. So we should change the values in the noise. But also, if you wanted, you can add more layers. By, for example, adding smoke or adding more particles being emitted from the region that's in the mask. And I will give you more interest in this effect. Yeah, again, I think that the noise is a bit too fast. And the values in the noise aren't the best for the position noise that is. But that gives you an idea on how it looks. And you can change the values as you please. If you haven't seen the trailer for the course that I'm teaching in our website, oksight.com, I will play it here. And make sure you enroll on our website. Thank you.

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\houdini-tutorial---simple-disintegration-fx\frame_000.jpg


---

## Structured Notes

### Core Technique
VOPs-based radial disintegration mask from centroid (2D XZ distance) with sparse convolution noise on the edge, driving: (1) Split Points per masked group → independent triangle pivots, (2) MakeTransform scale-down per triangle (using Import Primitive Attribute as pivot), (3) position noise multiplied by mask. All in Point VOPs; animate "anim" parameter for temporal control.

### Summary
Voxyde VFX 21-min tutorial on a simple disintegration effect (triangles break apart from center outward). Geometry: test squab → Remesh (target size 0.001, 10 iterations) = equal triangles. Mask (Point VOP): BBox node → average Pmin+Pmax = centroid → Vector to Float (X, Z only) → Float to Vector2 for both position and centroid → Distance 2D → fit to 0–1 (source min = "anim" param, max = anim+0.3 constant) → turbulent noise on position (sparse convolution, 3D, amplitude 0.5) → adds organic edge → export "mask" attribute. Animate "anim" from -0.5 (frame 1) to ~3.0 (frame 72). Group (points, `@mask > 0.001`) → Split Points (group only) → each triangle gets own points (can move independently). Point VOP "scale down": Import Primitive Attribute (Prim Position = triangle centroid) → MakeTransform pivot → Bind mask → fit(dest: 1→0, invert) → Multiply position by matrix = triangles shrink from own centroid. Point VOP "P noise": Anti-alias noise (Vector4: XYZ position + time W) → simplex type, amplitude 0.5, freq [5,5,5,0.1] → multiply by mask → only masked triangles jitter. Blast (@mask > 0.999) + Clean (remove unused points) = delete fully disintegrated pieces.

### Key Steps
1. **Remesh:** target size 0.001, iterations 10, recompute normals OFF → equal-sized triangles.
2. **Mask VOP (Point VOP node):**
   - BBox (first input) → average of Pmin + Pmax = centroid vector
   - Vector to Float → X, Z channels only (ignore Y height)
   - Float to Vector2 (position XZ) and same for centroid XZ
   - Distance → fit(source min="anim" promoted param, max=anim+0.3 constant) → 0–1 mask
   - Turbulent noise (sparse convolution, 3D, amplitude 0.5) added to position before Distance
   - Export "mask"
3. **Animate "anim":** key -0.5 at frame 1, ~3.0 at frame 72 (covers whole geometry).
4. **Group:** type=points, `@mask > 0.001`.
5. **Split Points:** split only the masked group → triangles get independent points.
6. **Scale Down VOP (Point VOP):**
   - Import Primitive Attribute → primitive position = triangle centroid
   - MakeTransform: pivot = primitive centroid; scale = Bind("mask") → fit(dest: 1→0, invert)
   - Multiply @P by transform matrix
7. **P Noise VOP (Point VOP):**
   - Vector to Vector4: append time ($T or $FF) as W component
   - Anti-aliased noise → simplex type, 3D sig, amp 0.5, freq [5,5,5,0.1]
   - Multiply by Bind("mask")
   - Add to @P
8. **Cleanup:** Blast `@mask > 0.999` (delete fully masked prims) + Clean (remove isolated points).

### Houdini Nodes / VEX / Settings
- Remesh: target size 0.001, iterations 10, recompute normals OFF
- Point VOP mask: BBox → Average → Vector to Float (X,Z) → Float to Vector2 → Distance → Fit; noise: sparse convolution, 3D, amplitude 0.5
- Promoted parameter "anim": controls fit source min (-0.5 → ~3.0); max = anim + 0.3 (add constant)
- Split Points: split only masked group (not all points)
- MakeTransform: pivot = Import Primitive Attribute (position); scale = inverted mask (fit dest: 1→0)
- Anti-alias noise for P: Vector4 input (XYZ pos + time W); simplex; freq 5/5/5/0.1; amplitude 0.5
- Blast: `@mask > 0.999` to delete fully disintegrated primitives
- Clean: remove unused points (do NOT remove degenerate primitives)

### Difficulty
Intermediate — VOPs required; concepts transferable to any radial/masked disintegration; straightforward once mask is understood

### Houdini Version
Houdini 19/20 (BBox node; standard VOPs; note: centroid node deprecated)

### Tags
#vops #disintegration #mask #noise #vfx #intermediate

---

## Related Tutorials
- `houdini-tutorial---wispy-smoke.md` — VFX shot pipeline (particle emission from destruction)
- `scientific-phenomena-in-houdini.md` — abstract VFX using similar procedural masking
- `noise.md` — noise deep-dive relevant to mask edge variation technique
- `intro-to-vops---houdini-beginner-tutorial.md` — VOPs fundamentals used throughout this tutorial
