---
title: Intro To Houdini Particles - Full Beginner Course
source: YouTube
url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=94YAomHfMbw
author: Voxyde VFX
ingested: 2026-06-23
houdini_version: "[PENDING]"
tags: []
extraction_status: pending
frames_dir: tutorials/frames/intro-to-houdini-particles---full-beginner-course/
frame_count: 8
---

# Intro To Houdini Particles - Full Beginner Course

**Source:** [YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=94YAomHfMbw)
**Author:** Voxyde VFX
**Duration:** 122m30s | 8 section(s)

---

## Raw Data (for Claude Code extraction)


### Basics [0:00]
**Transcript:** Particles in Udili can be pretty easy to set up and get some cool results, but they can be truly difficult to master.  We'll start off simple with all of the basics stuff, but then we are going to step a little bit outside of what I would call beginner level with some of the lessons.  So I don't want to just tell you what buttons to press or sliders to adjust to get pretty effects.  I want you to understand the fundamental concepts of how particle effects work.  Over the years in my professional career I had to make dozens if not hundreds of particle shots,  and these techniques I'm about to show you I applied in almost all of the shots.  They will also carry over to other types of simulations like Vela, Marbidis,  Flip, basically anything that deals with points.  So my goal with this course is to set you up for long term success so that no matter what particle effects you want to create,  you can apply these lessons.  I hope you will find this course useful and let's get started.  Let's dive in and let's get started.  I'll create a geometry container and let's step inside.  Now really all particle effects and all effects in general start with a source,  and it's usually a geometry source for particles.  So let's drop down a simple sphere and let's say that we want to spawn particles from this sphere.  So from here all we have to do is drop down a pop network.  So let's place this here and we'll plug the sphere into the first input of this pop net.  And now if I preview the result we can see we have some points spawning so if I play the simulation,  we just have some particle spawning and they're just chilling, they're not doing anything.  So let's make them do something.  We have a few settings on this node over here and we'll cover this in a second.  But the way we modify how our particles behave is by stepping inside this top network.  So let's double click to step inside and here's the actual solver.  So here's the pop solver and we have some other objects as well.  We have the pop object and the pop source.  So we'll take a look at these more in depth in a second.  But first let's make our particles do something.  So if I press step and type pop we can see there's really a lot of stuff for us to do.  And one of the more common ones that we'll usually use is going to be the pop force.  So let's drop down a pop force and we have this merge node here that says  wire pops into here.  So all we have to do is place this inside our merge node and if I reset the simulation  still nothing happens because we have to set some settings here.  So let's just make our particles move up for now.  And so this force option here I'll just give this a direction.  If I set this to 0, 1 and 0, this means that our particles should be moving up.  So if I press play now we see something finally happening with our particles.  We have some pre-built options here for the noise.  So if I increase the amplitude let's just set this to a value of 1.  And if I reset the simulation and press play now this is starting to look more like the  classical particle simulation.  In fact, from here we can just start layering some of these pop nodes and pop  stands for particles operator.  So whenever we're dealing with points or particles you want to use one of these pop nodes.  So let's take a look at the pop color.  Let's type here pop color and we'll just plug this here.  Now we have some colors and this is just a custom color as we can see.  We can change this.  I can make this red.  But really what you will usually do is map this to one of the attributes that are built in with  the particle.  So if I set this type here to a ramp and this by default is going to grab our normalized  age attribute.  So this is why this is an age and we'll just set this now to map to our age.  An age is one of the attributes that come with particles.  We'll take a deeper look into this a bit later.  But what this essentially means now is that when our particles are being born they start with an  age of zero and over the duration of one second they will fade to this wide value here.  So when I press play now they start off black and slowly ramp up to white and maybe we can increase  this span a little bit.  So let's maybe map this over a range of four seconds in age and we can also choose maybe one of  these other presets here.  Just so it's more obvious let's use black body and let's reverse the order of these colors.  So let's maybe just set this to three for range.  So now we can see we are starting to get something that actually looks pretty cool.  And I'll also press D on my keyboard and I want to go to the background tab here and I'll  change the background here to dark just so we can see this better.  And also I'll make this window larger and I'll close off this windows here and in this window if  I press P I'll just bring back my parameters.  So it's just easier for me to work this way again.  If I select a node here we'll just show the parameters over here to the to the right.  Now currently our particles are really lasting forever.  So we can remove them once they reach a certain age.  So if I go in the pop source here in the birth tab we can set their life to be a certain value.  So we can maybe make them less only to a value of 2.5.  So now 2.5 seconds after they're being born they will die off.  So if I play the simulation now they should die off a bit quicker and we can also add some  variants to this. So if I set a life variance to 0.5 now the particles will less from maybe  2 seconds to 3 seconds. So if I play the simulation now we should see more of an organic kind of decay  on the particle. So this is a lot more natural than all of than having all of the particles die  at the same time. So you usually want to add some variants here and we'll get more to all of these  in a second. But we can see with just a couple of nodes we already start to have something that  looks pretty decent and pretty cool and this was pretty simple right this was pretty easy  we just had a couple of nodes and you can imagine that if we just keep stacking a few more nodes  we can get something pretty complex and it's pretty easy to do right. So by now you're probably  thinking to yourself that this doesn't look so bad I can probably learn this in a couple of days  a week at most but unfortunately it's not that simple. And if you've seen other tutorials this way  of working stacking nodes on top of each other is what you've probably seen and what you're used to  and it's probably what the people at side effects wants us to do that's why they have this merge node  over here that says wire pops into here this stacking is what they want us to do and in fact let's just  further illustrate this I can add a let's do a pop drag and just add this over here and I can  increase the air resistance so this is useful when you have fast moving simulations that you want  to slow down over time so if I play the simulation now they're gonna start off rather fast but then  they're gonna slow down over time so this is what this air resistance will do for us and this is  just to further illustrate that we can just keep adding and stacking nodes on top of each other  until we get what we want but the reason that I don't like working this way is because this  doesn't give you the ultimate control over the particles you can get pretty good results and you  can get pretty far working this way and there are cases when you will have to work this way but  this at its core is extremely limiting and we are in Houdini precisely to remove those limits  doing it this way you're gonna keep running into walls over and over again and what I want to show  you is going to be a little bit more complex but this is how you will win in the long game so this  is where the geometry VOP node comes into play this is geometry VOP node is where all of the magic  happens and this is what trumps all of the other nodes so I will just connect this below my pop  source like so and I will hold down Y and disconnect all of my other pop forces and I'll just leave  them here to the side and as a side node you can also connect nodes by merging them like this so  this is what we did originally we are stacking them horizontally inside the merge node but you can  also just simply plug them in the chain vertically like so I prefer working this vertical way because  it kind of mimics the stop workflow but this will be just your preference this geometry VOP node we  can also merge this here as well but like I said I just like working vertically like so anyway if  you understand how this geometry VOP node works you can truly unlock the power of particles and  everything I'm about to show you will translate to the other simulations as well so if you're doing  fluids or widgets everything here will apply to those other simulations as well so let's just focus  up for a second and we'll step inside and really this geometry VOP is simply the attribute VOP from  the stop level so it's going to be important to know how the attribute VOP works and if you have  unwatched it already I will recommend my intro to VOP scores before watching this next part that  I'm about to show you so let's start with something simple and let's just mimic the force node that  we had earlier and just simply make our particles move up so if I replay the simulation now nothing  happens we are just pointing particles because we disconnected all of the other nodes all right so  let's step inside and we have a force output over here so this is the inputs and these are going  to be the outputs so we want to add a simple vector to the force output here that makes our particles  move up so we can just drop down a constant value let's set this to a tree float because we want a  vector I'll plug this in my force and I'll use the same vector I used earlier which is 0, 1 and 0  so if I reset the simulation and I press play we have the exact same thing that we had earlier so  nothing special yet the difference here is that I can plug this inside the velocity now so if I  want I can update the velocity instead of the force so when I do this and I reset the simulation  and press play now the particles move at a constant speed so we no longer have this acceleration  thing happening as we do with our force so if I plug this back in our force we can see our particles  start off slow almost at a speed of 0 and then they ramp up and settle at a given value here so we  can see this ramp up in speed happening so right away we run into this big problem where we can't  really control this acceleration if we want our particles to accelerate faster we could increase  this vector here so if I set let's say I want to make this five times faster I can set this to  0, 5 and 0 so now this vector that points up will have a five times bigger magnitude so if I  reset the simulation now we can see that the particles accelerate faster but obviously now we are  also carrying this vector throughout the entire simulation whereas I only wanted to affect the  acceleration part so I wanted them to start off fast and then settle at a lower speed so this is  super hard and really annoying to control with using this force method and this is the main problem  that we have and why people struggle with particles the people that who didn't need that made all of  these nodes that made all of the pop forces drag all of these if I type here pop we have really a lot  of these so when they made those nodes they assume that we want to work with this force output for  all simulations and they are correct in a sense that the force is meant to imitate how stuff behaves  so it's more physically accurate the problem is that when the director comes to you and says that  hey we have this character that charges up energy and we have particles that swirl around the  hand there's nothing physically accurate about that so with all of these nodes we are forced to use  the force but a lot of times I just want particles to behave exactly like how I tell them so let's  look into some more examples and with these examples we'll also explore more of the operations that  we can do inside the geometry vop and hopefully as you see these examples you will get a better idea  on why the geometry vop is really the better way to work when it comes to particles if you want to  learn how to use particles in real world projects you can check out my courses on Voxite.com these are  in-depth courses based on projects I worked on for League of Legends, Valorant and many other brands

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\intro-to-houdini-particles---full-beginner-course\frame_000.jpg

### Geometry VOP [13:06]
**Transcript:** so let's start with a pretty simple example and let's say that instead of having these particles move  just straight up let's make them go towards an end goal so I'll press you to step back outside at  the sub-level and here next to my sphere I can just drop down and add node and I'll hit this plus  to create a simple point we have a point here in the middle of our scene and also in our display  material icon here I will right click this and I'll switch the display here to points so now it's  just a little bit bigger maybe I can also press the on my keyboard and go to geometry settings and  I'll just increase the point size so we can see this better in our viewport so I can press enter  while having this end node selected and I can just drag this point up in space and let's say that  I want my particles to reach this point let's also drop down a null from here and I'll just rename  this to goal so we keep things nice and organized and this is what we'll actually use to reference  later in our geometry vop and now to make our particles go to this point we have to create this  direction vector and let's maybe just preview our sphere as well I'll press E on my sphere and  select the goal so we have this display this ghosted display on our sphere I'll just do a quick  screen grab of this and I'll step over in Photoshop so let's say we have a particle that's  spawning on our sphere maybe over here and we need this particle to reach our end goal over here  and we know from intro to vops that if we subtract this position from our own position we will get a  vector that points from our particle to our end goal now if we just do this subtraction this  vector will be quite big so we will want to normalize this so it's a unit length of one so now  no matter where our particle will end up this vector will have the same unit length so we will  have nice and consistent speed now back in hoodyne let's step inside our popnet so we'll go over  here inside this geometry vop we can grab the position of our particles from this sp over here  but we need a way to reference the position of our end goal point from the sub level inside  this geometry vop and this is where the geometry vop here in the top net is a little bit different  than the attribute vop in the subcontext so if I go up and I drop down an attribute vop which we  are familiar with from intro to vops I can plug the sphere here inside this first input for the  attribute vop and now I can do all kinds of operations we will access all of our points and our  op input 1 2 3 and 4 will correspond to these inputs here at the sub level but when we are inside  the geometry vop we don't have any of these four outputs but if I step inside we do have this  op input 1 2 3 and 4 here either way and the way we can use these when it comes to the geometry vop  is if we go up we can go to the input step and this is where we can specify what geometry we can use  to then later access from all of these op input op input parameters here so all we have to do is  let's say that we want input 1 over here to point to our goal geometry we can just go up and I will  grab let's actually get rid of this attribute vop we will grab this now with our goal I will press  control C I'll step back inside the popnet and in this geometry vop in the input step let's say  I want to access this from op input 1 I will set this to reference a sub geometry and I can just  paste the path to our goal here so all I did here was control v and this just grabs the path to  our null okay so let's go back inside and now from inside our geometry vop from op input 1 we can  reference the geometry so from our goal geometry we want to import a position attribute so for this  we can use the import point attribute node and by default this will specify our attribute p which  is the position which is what we want the signature is vector 3 which is what we want and we also  have to specify the point number now because we only have one point in our geometry this will  mean that the index value will be 0 so all we have to do here is we can middle mouse click on  this pt num I will promote this to a constant and by default this will give me a constant of 0  which is exactly what we want so all of this what is doing is we're just grabbing the position  from our goal point and now from here like we mentioned in this graph we have to subtract the  positions so back inside with iny we can subtract this position from our end goal let's use a subtract  and we'll subtract our own position now let's go ahead and disconnect this we no longer need this  so from this subtraction we get our direction vector and we want to normalize this to have a nice  constant length and we can just do a normalized from here and let's plug this into the force and let's  see what happens let's also preview this now I will right click this icon and choose pixels and  let's press play and we can see the particles are slowly starting to move towards our goal point  and as they increase in their speed let's play for a few more frames we can see they start to  overshoot and they step outside of the goal area and this will be more apparent if I go back up and  I increase their life expectancy let's maybe set this to a value of 10 and let's reset and play  so we can see clearly now that they overshoot and as they get further away from our goal they start  to slow down and after they slow down they're allowed to come further back to the end goal so this  is really hard and really kind of annoying to control and maybe I can illustrate this better if  we animate this goal point so let's go back up to the sub-level and before our null we can just  do a transform over here on our point let's go ahead and I'll just add a keyframe for the  translation values I'll hold down alt and left click to add a keyframe here and I'll just go maybe  to the end of our timeline frame 240 and let's press enter in the viewport here and I'll just move  this over to the side all right and this will automatically add a keyframe for us and now we can  see we have let's maybe turn this back to point display now we can see that our goal is traveling  across our across our scene so let's go back to pixel display and now this will be more obvious  what happens when we update our force so if I press play now let's see we see that over here  right where our particles are converging this is where currently our goal point is and we can see  that as the particles overshoot they again start to slow down and they will start to try to go back  to the end goal so we can see this clearly now okay so this is this is the result that it's  happening and obviously this is not what we want we just want the particles to go to our end goal  point so what we can do is we can just step inside here and if we update the velocity instead we  should now get the expected result so we have a little not thing happening here now we can we'll  deal with this in a second but we can see now that our particles are just going towards that goal  and they're also following the updated position of this goal so this is exactly what we would  expect to happen all right we can see that this is a lot more controllable now and if I want this  to go faster I can just scale this vector up so after this normalize I can do a multiply constant  and if I want the particles to go twice as fast I could just set this multiplier to a value of two  all right and now again they're moving fast but they're stopping right around the goal point  whereas if I again if I use the force here and especially now that they're going twice as fast  this will be even more chaotic so they're overshooting even more now and they're having a hard time  going back to the end goal now this is a pretty cool effect as well and you might need to do this  sometime but a lot of the time what we need is just exactly what we expect we want the particles  to move to a specific place in a specific way at a specific speed and one simple way to fix  this not thing happening here is we can simply kill the particles off before they reach the  end goal so we can see that maybe at frame 30 they reach their end goal which means that if we  set their life if I go up and go back in my pop source if I set their life to maybe 1.2 seconds  which is roughly 30 frames so again 24 frames will mean that we have a life expectancy of one  so I'm just increasing this value a little bit to maybe 1.2 let's remove the variance or let's maybe  just use a low variance 0.1 and if I reset we see now that they get removed basically based on their  age when they reach this point so this is one way to fix this there's a million ways to fix this  don't worry about this for now it's not really the point I'm trying to make the point is to  illustrate the differences between updating velocity and force and now the cool thing about  using the geometry VOP also is that we can build on top of what we have so let's maybe make some  room here and instead of just adding things here what I like to do usually to keep things a little  bit more organized is I can grab this input node over here and I can hold down out and drag this  over to duplicate this and I can do further things from here so it's going to be the same as if I  were to use this same one but we can get a little bit messy with the wiring so I like to make a new  copy for this let's add some noise to the simulation and we can use a curl noise with a 4D  signature which will give us the best results so from our position let's do a vector to vector 4  and I'll plug the time in the second input here now all this vector for business means that  it's essentially just going to animate the noise so this is what the fourth component stands for  in a vector to vector 4 when it comes to noise so don't really worry about this for now let's just  do a curl noise from here and let's set the noise type let's use analytic fast simplex noise  which I found gives the best results and now what we can do is simply add this let's maybe just  get rid of this multiply constant so we don't have the particles move as fast so all we have to do now  is just add our noise on our original direction so from here we'll do an add and the result of this  noise let's just plug this here and if I play this now we can see instant magic and this is the secret  right here we get the direction what we want we add some noise on top and we can have any type  of movement and when we add our noises and we control the particles further we can really get  super cool looking magical effects especially and we will have complete control over what happens  during our entire simulation and we can see that this is already looking pretty cool and for  example we could animate our goal point to move in specific directions and these particles would  follow that goal precisely maybe I can make the particles last a little bit longer let's maybe  try a value of two all right so it's moving towards the end goal and everything starting to look  pretty cool and maybe I can just bring back my pop color I can place this over here all right  so we can see really cool effects now again if I were to use the force instead with this noise on top  if I plug this inside the force we'll have an even harder time controlling the effect let's maybe  make the particles last longer I'll set the life back to a value of 10 and if I play the simulation  now and let's actually remove the pop color for now we can disable or rather bypass any node if  if we press Q so I'll just turn off this pop color for now and reset the timeline and we can see  we have an even harder time controlling our particles this noise creates all kinds of acceleration  problems for us and it's really starting to look like a mess and even if I were to decrease the  amplitude here to maybe a lower value of 0.3 this might help us fix the things a little bit but still  it's going to not give us the results that we want so again we want to use velocity instead  and this is the result so I can increase the amplitude even further and we can see that it's still  doing a pretty good job trying to match the position of our goal point let's set this back to one  so this here is really just scratching the surface and just as an example let's say that maybe we  want to control this amplitude so the strength of our kernel noise based on our age so if I grab  the age and plug this inside the amplitude now this will mean that when our particles spawn they  will have a they will have no strength on the noise and over the period as they age they will  start to increase the amplitude so if I play the simulation now we see that they start with no  noise and after a while they start to introduce this noise inside the simulation now this is kind  of getting out of hand after a few seconds so to further control this we can remap the age value so  I will just grab this wire that goes from the age to the amplitude and I will do a feet range over  here and now we can say that when our age has a value of 0 up until it has a value of 1 I want the  amplitude to go from 0 to 1 so right away with the default settings this will give us more controllable  results because now the amplitude is not allowed to go further this value of 1 so if I want I can  clamp this strength of the kernel noise to maybe 0.5 so it's not as strong all right or I can even  reverse this effect and say that I want amplitude when they start right as they spawn and then as they  age let's decrease this strength so I can reverse the destination mean and max here I can  set this to 1 and 0 so if I play now they start off with a high strength in the kernel noise and then  they will no longer receive this kernel noise as they age so this is also helping us to control  the simulation a lot more and for example I can maybe decrease how fast the amplitude decay so I  can reduce the source max here and only right as they spawn they will get this strength and then  very quickly no longer receive any strength of the noise so maybe I can now increase the destination  mean so I can set this to a value of 3 and I can spend a lot of time here and really hopefully  this gives you an idea on the amount of control that we have and I just want to show you one more thing  with this age if I reset the value so let's go from 0 to 1 to 0 and 1 I can use a ramp  after the fit so let's drop down a ramp parameter I'll set this to a spline ramp and the way we can  change this is at the top level so I'll press U to go up one level and we have to change this over  here so if I expand this window I can reset the ramp if I hold on control and middle mouse click  on where it says ramp over here and this default ramp will be will go from 0 to 1 so we'll have  the same result we had in the first place but now for example let's say that when our particles  have an age of 0.3 I want the maximum strength and when they have an age value of 1 they have a  strength of 0 so now somewhere in between after this spawn and when they reach their gold point  this is where we will apply the strength okay so this is again to illustrate the amount of  control that we have and also let's step back inside I'll get rid of this connection here for our  color noise I'll just leave this as a amplitude of 1 we can also use this age thing here let's get  rid of the ramp and from this fit from our age let's multiply our original direction so if I  use a multiply here I can plug our fit result and we'll leave the fit as the default values so now  if I press play let's actually maybe just disconnect the color noise for now and just focus on the  direction strength if I press play we can see we have kind of the same result that we had with  the force where we create this acceleration for the particles to ramp up in speed over time using  our age so we get this smooth nice transition for our particles as they start to spawn and we  don't have to worry about that over shooting nightmare that we have with the force so there's really  sky is the limit here there's really a lot of things that we can do and for example if I were to  go up and I wanted to recreate this effect with pop notes we can use let's maybe I'll disable the  geometry of again with Q let's use a pop attract so what we did with our geometry of really it's  just recreating this pop attract let's place this here and with this note selected I can press  enter in the viewport and I can just set an end goal let's maybe just use the same kind of  position that we had earlier so if I reset the simulation we had the exact same thing that we  had earlier with our force as we can see now the particles over here will start to go back to  reach our end goal but again this is the problem that we don't have the option to update the  velocity instead and also the strength of the geometry VOP is that we can add the noises and we can  add on top of what we have without relying on the pre-built nodes so for example here if I wanted to  add some turbulence as well we would have to use a different node so we have to use a pop force  to combine this here with our pop attract and I can increase the amplitude all right so I want to  introduce some noise but again this will just mess up my entire simulation now usually with a lot  of these pop forces you have to use the pop drag as well so we have the pop drag from earlier over  here and I can place this here so this is a way to slow down the system over time and this is  specifically to avoid kind of this over-shooting problem so if I play the simulation now let's maybe  go to the drag settings let's leave this air resistance to the default value of one so let's  press play and let's maybe just disable the pop force so we can concentrate only on what the pop  attract is doing we can see now that with the pop drag we no longer have this kind of over-shooting  but we still end up with kind of a weird result to be honest so this is just kind of a weird and  hard way of working and we can see how much easier and clearer it is when we are using the geometry  VOP and we update the velocity but if we wanted to we can still use the geometry VOP and update the  force instead and we will still have a lot more control than relying on what the guys at Houdini  built up for us because these settings here are all limited now their dirty secret is that if I  right click and choose allow editing of contents I can step inside and see how they build this node  and if I step inside any of these nodes we can see that really what's driving this is this  geometry VOP node all right over here so if I step inside this is everything that's inside the  pop attract now there's really a lot of different tabs here because all of these correspond if I go  up a couple of levels all of these parameters here that are exposed for us correspond to all of these  steps so this is why it's kind of looking like a mess but you can still go inside any of these  pop nodes and you can see exactly how they build them with the geometry VOP so if I go up and I  inspect the path force we can click right click allow editing of contents step inside and here  we have it it's a geometry VOP and if I step inside we can see that at the base of it it's really  just a curl noise so the same thing that we did earlier but we can see that this is exporting back  to the force attribute so this is the problem with all of these nodes and really they could have  solved all of this if they just made a switch exposed for us to make us choose whether we want to  export to the force output or the velocity output I don't know why they didn't do this it would be  really easy to set up but regardless in the long game you want to master the geometry VOP yourself  so you can build whatever kind of logic you want so this is the first example that I wanted to show  and I want to show you just one more example because this is such an important topic I really want  to help you solidify these core concepts for our second example let's do a classic tornado

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\intro-to-houdini-particles---full-beginner-course\frame_001.jpg

### VOP Examples [35:46]
**Transcript:** simulation so I'll go ahead and let's get rid of this geometry VOP I'll just disconnect this and  place it over to the side and for a tornado simulation we might need to change the geometry source  so I'll go up and instead of a sphere let's drop down a torus and let's plug this here and maybe  for my torus let's look at our torus I'll just increase the first radius value here let's just  make this bigger and maybe decrease the second value so it's kind of thin and I might want to just  increase the resolution for the subdivisions this will be fine let's go back inside so currently  we are not doing anything let's actually get rid of this pop color as well and let's go to our  pop source I've should have done this from the beginning let's just disable the guide geometry  so we just see our points all right so if I press play nothing happens or our points just spawn  and now if we want to do a tornado effect with our pop forces nodes we can use a pop  axis force let's drop this here and if I press play nothing happens and this is already a problem  that's really annoying this pop force works with this radius that we have inside here and we have  to increase our radius and now we can see if I press play our particles start to spin and they're  kind of going crazy and they're escaping so now in order to compensate for the shooting out of  the particles we have to go I believe let's go in our speed and there is a suction speed option  here so I have to increase this and now if I press play this will be a force that's dragging  that's pooling the particles closer inside so maybe I can reduce this and I also want to add a  lift speed which will make our particles raise let's maybe use a value of 0.5 for our lift  and let's press play so we are kind of starting to get what we want now again we have to adjust  the radius so we'll go in the shape tab and we'll just increase the height maybe if I press  enter I believe we can also use these handles here so we are kind of guessing the height of our  tornado let's take a look at our simulation now it's kind of starting to look how it is but we can  see that the particles are pooling closer at the beginning and then they are again escaping so  really there's a lot of problems here but if I were to spend a couple of extra seconds on this I  might want to add a pop drag so usually with all of these axes with all of these force nodes we  want to add drag so right away we should have a better result all right this kind of works let's  also just do turbulence so let's add a pop force and let's increase the amplitude and also  introduce some noise and maybe I'll just increase the lift speed let's set this to 1 so with  the rising faster and maybe I'll decrease the amplitude of the pop force so I don't really want  to spend a lot of time here but this is to illustrate that you can get a pretty decent result we  can see that this is actually looking like a pretty good simulation for the most part this could  be a good base for a tornado so this is pretty cool but again we don't have the control that we  want so thanks but no thanks we're just gonna go ahead and use the geometry VOP we'll start with  a fresh one so if I reset we just have our particle spawning so we'll use the same concepts from  the first example and we'll apply it here meaning that we'll generate a direction vector first  that will create the general direction of our particles and then we'll just add some noise on top  now I'll just do a quick screen grab of this and step over in Photoshop for sec we need our  particles to go in sort of like this direction which is also spinning and going up at the same  times so we need to create a vector that spins so it's going in this direction like so and then we  can combine this we can add on top of this vector if we just add a simple vector that points straight  up like so we get the combination between these two vectors that end up in a result that looks  something like this so this is how we will get this vector again that's also spinning and going  up at the same time now for our green vector here this vector that points straight up this will  be just a simple constant of 0 1 and 0 it's this other vector that's spinning around which we  can't really just set directly so this is the one that's a little bit trickier to get now we already  solved this problem in the intro to VOP series but I'll just explain this again in order to get  this vector so if we have a point that's over here and we need this to spin around the origin  of our scene so this is the this is the vector that we want to get we can use a cross product to get  this vector and a cross product is just a vector that's perpendicular to the plane that other two  vectors create so if we imagine the perpendicular plane that this vector falls onto we can kind of  draw this over here so it looks something like this all right so this is this imaginary plane  that's perpendicular to our vector and now these will be the vectors that we need to get and create  a cross product between them so we can get our vector all right now we can see that one of these  is actually just a simple up vector okay so again this is just a vector that points straight up so  this is going to be 0, 1 and 0 and this other vector over here we can get if we just subtract the  position of our point with the center of our scene which is 0 0 0 so we'll just grab our position  and we'll subtract this value and we'll get this vector and then this vector we already know 0, 1  and 0 so now we can create a cross product between these and we will get this vector so let's see  how this looks in VOPs we'll step inside our geometry VOP and so again we'll need to grab the  center here let's simply do a constant and we'll set this to be a tree float and we'll just leave  this at 0 0 0 so it's going to be this origin over here so now we'll grab the position of each point  let's go ahead and let's actually subtract from our center we'll do a subtract and we'll subtract  the position of our particle so a point and a particle is the same thing in Houdini now we'll also  have to normalize this and usually when we are doing cross products we want to work with normalized  vectors so from the subtract we'll do a normalized and from here we'll do a cross product so let's  drop down a cross product and we can either plug a value directly as the second vector here or we  can just set it ourselves directly inside the cross product node parameters here and we can  already see that this is set to the 0 1 and 0 vector which again is this one that we need that  points up so now from here from our cross product I can just plug this result in our V and we  should see our particles start to spin and this is great so now from here all we have to do is  simply add on top of this vector so we'll drop down an add we'll drop down a constant and we'll  use the same vector let's set this to triflot and we also want to add this 0 1 0 vector that points  up and we'll plug this here so now if we play our particles are spinning and moving up at the same  time so the cool thing here is now that if I want the particles to not move up as fast I can just  decrease the value of this vector here so this constant let's set this to 0.5 so now they're moving  up twice as slow and we can also control the spinning so after this cross product if I multiply  this length of the vector we can simply do a multiply constant and if I want to move them if I  want them to spin twice as fast I'll just increase the multiplier to a value of 2 so now they're  spinning twice as fast and we can exactly control what we want so for example now we can maybe  instead of this multiply constant I can drop down a multiply and let's say that maybe we want  our particles to spin faster as they age so again we can reference our age attribute I just  created the duplicate of this so we can plug the age attribute in our multiply and now we can see  that as they start to age they will increase their spinning more and more so we can do all of the  stuff that I showed you in the first example but let's for now just go ahead and add our noise  in fact for this I can just go up and let's go inside our first example and I'll just grab this  noise setup because we already made it so this will be the curl noise I'll just control C so I can  just copy this and I will paste this inside my new geometry vault network and I will just simply  add this to our vector and let's take a look now that we are using a different scale we might want to  decrease the frequency of this usually what I like to do is I use one set of noise for big swirls  so let's maybe decrease this and also decrease the amplitude so sometimes I like to use one curl  noise for big swirls and then I can just simply duplicate this and for this one I can increase  the frequency and just decrease the amplitude so this will give me finer details so if I press play  now we start to layer some of these noises and we can get a really complex effects and now again at  any point we can map any of these values or our vectors to our age so we can also grab our position  for example and we can do a vector to float so we can split up this vector and if we grab our  second value here this will be the Y component of our position so we can say that whenever a  particle's position is higher than maybe a value of two so it's maybe somewhere around here we can  make it do different stuff so we can maybe stop it or we can increase the speed or whatever else  we want to do we have the option to do this we can also introduce that suction thing we have  in our force so when we do our subtraction here and normalize this this vector again if we look at  this it's going to be this vector here that points from our origin so we can use this if I just  plug this in our add let's take a look all right now we can see we also have this suction going on  and we can now simply scale this we can do a multiply constant and we can scale this back so it's  not as harsh or I maybe increase this even more and again we can scale this with age we can scale  this with whatever and we really have a lot more control this way now I know that I'm really  throwing a lot of stuff at you I'm probably stepping outside of the beginner zone but I really  don't think there's any point in me bullshitting you into using any of these pop nodes when I never  use them in my professional work anyway in fact the pop axis force node I probably never used  precisely because it's so hard to control and I couldn't get it to work the way that I want so if  all of this didn't make a lot of sense to you I will encourage you to maybe watch this a couple more  times and try this setup yourself you can also try to draw the vectors on paper or whatever  yourself to try to see how you could create different vectors and I really encourage you to  experiment so try out different values for example try out if you were to use inside this cross  product maybe you can use a value of zero or rather one zero and zero and see what kind of result  you get you can see we are starting to get some really cool interesting effects so let's maybe  also see zero zero and one because now I'm curious what happens okay so it's just going in the  other direction but you can see that we're getting some really interesting stuff going so try this  out try to experiment and use VOPs as much as you can try to incorporate them in your practice and  like I said earlier a lot of this will translate to all the other simulations as well so when you're  doing a flip or widgets or pyro all of this stuff will really apply there as well this essentially  just rewires your brain into thinking in Houdini terms so it takes some practice and effort  initially but this stuff will carry over throughout your entire Houdini journey all of this is  stuff you could have done 10 versions ago in Houdini and it's stuff you will be able to do 10  versions later in Houdini no matter how many pop nodes the Houdini guys will add for us so by now  you probably get the point and I'm trying to make this is how I prefer to control particles we  might get into more examples later and I will also probably want to show you some examples when  you do want to use some of these pop nodes so these are not useless by any means like I said they  still show up in a lot of cases and we'll take a look at them later but for now I want to focus  in the next lesson on this pop source and sourcing particles in general so now that we kind of

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\intro-to-houdini-particles---full-beginner-course\frame_002.jpg

### Sourcing [50:14]
**Transcript:** have an idea on how the particles can move equally as important is how we are sourcing in the  particles so let's talk more about this pop source node over here and to better explain this we  can change the source geometry so I'll go up and let's replace this store us let's just do a simple  grid and I'll plug this here let's go to our grid and let's increase the subdivisions here let's  do 100 by 100 and let's see if this works all right so let's go back inside and in our source  tab we have this emission type set to scatter onto surfaces now there are some other types which  we will get to in a second let's focus on this one for now now this does exactly what it says it's  each frame it's looking at our geometry and it's scattering points onto it so maybe I can set this  to a point display and actually let's just disable the geometry for now and let's make these  particles static so if I go forward in time we can see each frame we are just simply adding a new  set of points on top of the previous set of points that we had and each frame we get a different  seed for our scatter so we can control the amount of points we scatter through the birth tab if I  increase this if I add another zero here we will scatter 10 times as many points now in the source  tab we also have with this mode with scatter onto surfaces we have an emission attribute option  so we can define a attribute on our geometry so if I go up I can add a attribute on our grid which  will specify where we want more points to spawn so we can use a noise to create this attribute  let's go ahead and just do an attribute of up and there are a lot of noise or rather nodes that we  can add noise to but let's just get used to the attribute of up as well at the sub level and let's  step inside so let's grab our P and let's do an anti alias flow noise and we can preview how  this looks if I plug this in our CD all right so this will be the pattern let's disconnect this  color connection and let's export this let's create our attribute we will do a bind export and  let's create an attribute called emit like so we can give this any name you want it doesn't have to  be emit but let's just use emit in this case so now if I go up I can go in my pop net and inside  the pop source inside the emission attribute I can specify to look for this emit attribute and now  we can see where we have higher values on our emit this is where we will have more points so if I  play the simulation now let's maybe turn back on our geometry VOP and let's actually rename this to  tornado VOP all right so if I press play now with this additional noise on our source we will have an  an even more interesting effect so let's set this back to pixel display and now we can see with the  noise variation in our source this is looking a lot more organic and more interesting maybe I'll  go back in my geometry VOP and inside the cross a product over here let's set this back to 0, 1 and  0 so this is now going straight up and I might want to just increase the lifting speed here so  with this constant I'll set this to 0, 1 and 0 so now they just rise a little bit faster but this  is also we can see our emission a little bit better all right so let's go back up now back in our  attribute VOP let's rename this to add noise back inside our attribute VOP let's check our  spreadsheet real quick we can see that our emite attribute has values that go from around  negative point four to a value of positive point four and it's generally not recommended to have  negative values so when you are sourcing in most types of simulation as well so what we can do  is let's step inside and let's remap the values of our noise let's use a feet range and let's say  that our source mean and max let's do negative point five to 0.5 and we will just remap these to 0 and  1 all right so now we have nice clean values that go from 0 and 1 and if I go back to my pop net  we should have the same effect or rather now that we have a lot of values that are closer to 0 but not  completely zero we have a lot of points spawning in a lot of areas so maybe I can go back in our  feet and I can increase the source main let's use negative point three all right so we can  tighten up the ranges here let's use maybe point one or rather negative point one and let's also  reduce the source max all right so feel free to play around an experiment with the values but we  can see the results that we get and also now with our flow noise we can change the frequencies so I  can make this pattern larger and we can also animate these noise over time so this will translate  to our simulation so what I can do simply to animate this we can animate this flow parameter in our  flow noise so if I increase this we can see how our pattern changes I can simply plug the time  inside the flow value over here and now if I if I just look at the result of my source let's  maybe just create a visualizer for this if I click the information I can click on this emit  attribute and let's turn on visualizer so here we have the pattern and we can see how this is  evolving over time so maybe this is evolving a little bit too fast I can simply scale down this  time here so let's do a multiply constant and let's scale this down to maybe 0.25 all right so  now it's four times as slow so this is looking better and if I go back up let's leave the visualizer  on so we can get some kind of trippy effects and if I play the simulation now we are also evolving  the noise over time so we are introducing even more variation and we can see what kind of a crazy  results we can get there is another extra option here for our emission if we go to the again back  to our pop source we can turn on scale point count by area and this sort of X as a reverse multiplier  meaning that the if I reset the timeline the more I decrease this setting the more points we  will scatter per area and this will take into account this emit attribute so it will only  spawn more points based on the emit attribute and if I go back up we can check and now we can see  very quickly we are adding up so we are currently at around three million points and now this is  starting to look more like a high quality simulation so let's maybe just go back over here and I'll  actually just disable the scale point count so you can either decrease this value here in the  scale point count by area now this only works I think if you have this emission attribute or you can  just simply go to the birth tab and you can increase the constant birth rate here to increase the  particle count so the more randomness you add the generally the better results you will get let's  maybe let's disable this visualizer and particles by nature inherit all of the attributes from our  source and we'll go more in depth about this later but let's add some noise on our color of our  source so back inside our attribute pop one of my favorite noises is the Voronoi noise so let's  drop down a Voronoi noise and from the seed here we can generate a random value and let's output a  3d color all right let's add this option here to 3d color and let's plug this into our CD so this  is what we get and let's just leave this as it is and let's go to our popnet and let's press play  and this is the result that we get so really really interesting stuff we can do so this is why sourcing  is really important now there are some limitations to this option here scatter onto surfaces  namely it's limited to the amount of resolution the geometry has so if I go up and I go back to my  grid now in this grid I intentionally set the rows and columns to high amount to 100 by 100 so if  I set this to something like 5 by 5 now because we have less points on our geometry we are going to  lose all of the detail in our noises so we can see that this is how our noise looks and if I go  back to my popnet we have a completely different result so we don't have enough points on our geometry  to create all of this nice detail for our noise so again if I go back here and I have 50 by 50 if I  check my attribute verb now we have a little bit more resolution and even more if I were to set  this to 200 by 200 we can see in real time how much detail we get with more resolution but we  don't want to be limited with our topology so what happens is in production you will often  receive a mesh let's maybe say that you have a task to emit particles from a shield and that shield  may have large flat surfaces where the modular didn't set a lot of topology and then around the edges  maybe we have a lot of polygons so the topology is more condensed so we are limited in that sense  to the topology when we are creating our noises so in this case it's better if we simply scatter  our own points and we feed those points into the popnet so I will disconnect this attribute  verb here let's go back to our grid and let's say that we have a really low poly geometry let's use  2 by 2 so it's just one polygon if we do our own scatter let's drop a scatter here let's  disable relax iterations and let's just increase or maybe let's leave the total count as it is  but I'll disable the max point limit now we can use these points directly in our popnet so if I go  to the popnet here let's set this emission type here let's set this to all points so now we are  going to use exactly the points that we are feeding into our popnet all right so if I press play  now we see this is the result and now we are getting this trail kind of effect and this is because  our scatter is no longer randomized per frame so if I look at what we have each frame we are in fact  just using the same points that we have so we have to change the seed ourselves on the scatter so  in this scatter here I will go to the global seed here and I will just link this to the frame  so we will just add an expression here dollar sign f like so so this evaluates to our current frame  we can see we are on frame 11 and on frame 12 we are going to have a different seed and we can see  that each frame we are getting a new set of points and now if we go back to our popnet and press play  we have the same result that we had earlier with our scatter onto surfaces type now here it's  best practice instead of this dollar f expression it's better to use dollar ff expression and this  ff is to account for any sub steps that you may have in your simulation so when you increase  the sub steps here and we'll go over this in a second this will make sure that we are given a  different seed for each step that might be in between frames as well don't worry too much about  this we'll talk more about this later but anyway back in our popnet we have the same result  we had originally but now what we can do is we can simply add our noise after the scatter all  right so if I play the simulation now we have almost the same thing that we had earlier so if I  play the simulation now we have the same thing that we had earlier but we are not limited to our topology  so again in our grid we only have one polygon so it's going to be the same even if we have more topology  here so if I set this back to 100 by 100 we are going to get the same results so this is now only  dependent on our scatter points here I can simply increase the force total count I can set this to  10,000 and now this will be the result so we have a lot of resolution and again in our grid I can  set this to a 2 by 2 or a 5 by 5 it doesn't matter as long as our source looks like this so this  will be our points we are going to get the same result so a lot of time what we do in simulations is  we just experiment at a lower point count so I might do my experiments on 1000 until I get the colors  and the movement right and then when I want to make the final high quality resolution I would just  increase the count here to maybe add another zero so we stand times as many points and then this is  the simulation that I would cache so let's set this back to 1000 now the problem here with this  all points emission is we are no longer having this option to use an emission attribute so what we can  do in this case we can simply delete the points that have an emite attribute of zero so after our  attribute valve here where we create our emite attribute let's go up and we can simply use a  blast node I will set the group type here to points and I will add a simple expression which  will say that if the emite attribute is zero then go ahead and remove those points so if I turn  this on enough we can see we get rid of all these points so now we roughly have the same result  that we had earlier when we use the emission attribute maybe I can force this more a little bit  let's increase more let's scatter more points and if I go in the attribute valve here in my  feed range let's just squeeze the source mean a little bit more all right so now let's just maybe  look at our source with our blast this is what we are sourcing these are the points and when we  are creating the simulation it looks something like this so now we have all of the variation from our  noises and we are not dependent on the topology that we are using so oftentimes this is my preferred  method of working but of course you can still use the scatter onto surfaces type this works really  well with curves a lot of the time so that's really useful but again I prefer the old points  usually and here we have a couple more types that we can look into let's set this to all geometry  now in order for this to work let's go up and let's just use the grid as it is so I'll just simply  plug the grid okay before the scatter let's just disconnect this so here is our grid and if we  look at the result now let's press play we can see this very trippy kind of result and I will press  shift w to hide the wireframe and this is the result that we get so this is actually looking pretty  cool pretty interesting so what's happening here is that this old geometry setting will bring in  the points and bring the primitives along with the points so usually with the other types of  emission types whether it's all points points or scatter onto surfaces this usually this regards  the primitive geometry whether you have it or not but when it's said to all geometry this will  carry over the curves and the primitives and polygons and really everything on top of the point so  this is the result that we are getting and what's happening here is that each frame we are spawning  a different sheet of polygons so we are sourcing in grids every frame if I go frame by frame  let's actually press shift w to bring back our wireframe view so if I step forward one frame or  a couple of frames and by the way I'm using the arrow keys to scroll through frames on my timeline  we can kind of see some spacing between our sheets over here so between our our grids and this is  really what's happening we can see each frame we just bring another set of or rather another grid  object into our system so this is why we have this kind of a trippy effect so this works on curves as  well if I were to go up let's set the grid let's go to our grid here and if I set the connectivity  here to columns we just have we turn all of these into curves basically so maybe I can just reduce  the columns amount let's use maybe let's use 25 and this will carry over as well so the curves  to our pop system as well so if I press play now we can see that our curves are being  got vectored it's actually we are just changing the points position but we are just simply bringing  the curve primitive along with the points so this is the result that we have and again we are just  spawning a lot of curves each frame but you can get some very interesting results this way and if I  set this back to let's reset so I will hold on control a middle mouse click over here and let's  set the rows here to 50 by 50 now if you are using this all geometry type the topology will be  important so if I don't have enough subdivisions this will not look like a very cool effect so it's  important to note that again we are just really operating over the points and bringing the primitives  along with them so we can see that it's it kind of looks like a cloth simulation but it's not really  anything close to it because we have a lot of intersections so it won't matter for our points  if the primitives are colliding with each other as opposed to what happens in our real cloth  simulation if you use vellum for example so that's just something to keep in mind but you can still  get some pretty cool effects now if we just want to use one single grid so one single sheet of  polygons here we can go inside our pop source and in the birth tab so this is all geometry in the  birth tab we have this impulse activation option so this if it's one it's going to keep bringing in  the geometry and if this is zero it's not going to use the geometry so what we can do is we can  set this to one and we can simply animate this value so I can use I can hold down alt and left click  to add a keyframe I can move forward one frame so on frame two I will set this value to zero so now we  only have a geometry source for the first frame and if I simulate if I press play we only have one  sheet of this polygon grid and usually people prefer to use an expression here so I will control  shift click on the value let's set this back to one and we can use an expression we can set a  condition here which we can evaluate to true or false so one or zero and we can say that  let's say dollar sign f equals equals one so this means that if our current frame is one this  will be true so it's going to be one and the next frame when we have frame two and further our  condition will no longer be true so it will be zero so this now a value is to zero and it will be  one as we can see here only when we are on frame one if I move forward one frame this will be zero  and the other frames as well so again we have the same result but we just use an expression here  so people usually prefer to use expression in this impulse activation option we can also say  maybe that if we want to spawn grids for the first 10 frames instead of this condition here let's  say that if the frame so dollar sign f less than or equal to 10 all right this will evaluate true  for the first 10 frames so if I press play we are spawning 10 sets of grids and then we are no  longer spawning them so again this is just spawning them for the first 10 frames so this is also quite  common that you will see people using now we can affect how our sourcing operations behave in  this birth tab with the impulse activation here or let's control shift click and set this back  to one we can affect our sourcing at the sub level so if I go up let's maybe use points instead  let's turn this back to point so I will reconnect my scatter and let's go inside here and this will  give us the same effect if we set this or rather if we leave it to all geometry so if I press play  this will work but let's just use all points instead again is the same thing because we don't  have primitives here the all geometry will be the same so let's just actually leave this as all  geometry now if I want I can delete points over time and this will affect our sourcing so if I go  up at the sub level well after our blast node let's do another attribute verb and let's say  let's rename this to fade source we can step inside and using a random value we can start  removing some of the points so from our pitynum let's use this as a seed inside a random function  and if I do a compare from here I can say if this is greater than a given value let's go ahead and  remove those points so I can preview how this looks if I just plug this in the CD we can see that  as I start to increase this value all of our points start to turn black so they're not really  disappearing it's just that they're turning black we still have them all right so we can use this  value to remove points so instead of plugging this inside the CD we can use this inside an if  block so again this is like an if statement we are just using this basically as a condition so if  I drop down an if block let's go ahead and say that if this condition is true let's go ahead and  remove point all right and we want to run this over all of our points so let's plug the pitynum  inside the pitynum for the remove point handle sometimes this errors out so if I press Q to  buy best and and enable it again this will now work so if I now play around with our condition so  our compare value here we can see we can start to delete points we can't animate parameters inside  this VOP context so we will have to promote our second input let's middle mouse click promote  and I'll go up and now we can animate this value here so what I'll do let's start with zero I will  add a keyframe hold down alt and left click let's go go forward maybe 48 frames I'll start to reveal  all of my points so I'll set this to one and then maybe up until frame 96 let's set this back to  zero so we are going to slowly fade our points in and then fade them out and as a result let's look  at our particles we can see that on our first frame we are not having any particles and if I  press play they're slowly going to start to appear over time and then after frame 48 where we have  all of our points we are removing them again over time and this will be the result okay so this is  very useful when you have maybe some sort of burst type of effects or anything really that  requires your source to not be on all the time but you don't want it to abruptly and like when  we are using the impulse activation so really all there is to note here is that you can affect how  your source behaves in the sub-level and it will translate over in the particle simulation whether  you remove or add points as well and finally we have one more emission type here which we can  look into which is points now I don't find myself using this option what points will do is it's going  to bring in only a certain amount of points so if I go up we have our scatter here at the sub-level  and we have roughly 2,400 points this point option will only bring a few of those randomly so  where all points bring in all of the points points option here will just bring a few of the points  which is controlled with the barf tab if I set this to a lower value and I reset and press play we  see we are sourcing in the points from the sub-level but we are really only grabbing a few of this  so if I set this to a higher value we can bring in more points basically so I don't usually find  myself using this option because if I just want to have less points I would just control the  scatter directly here at the sub-level so I would just remove some of the points directly myself  and I would get more of an expected result this points thing here is kind of hard to control this  points option is somewhere between all points and scatter on to surfaces it's kind of a weird  blend between the two so usually I would either use all points or scatter onto surfaces and not  this points option but sometimes this might be useful so this is what it will do now particles can

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\intro-to-houdini-particles---full-beginner-course\frame_003.jpg

### Attributes & Inheritance [75:50]
**Transcript:** inherit any attribute from the source so let's take a look at an example where this is useful  let's maybe just start fresh and we want to create something like a explosion burst type of effect  so let's start fresh and I'll drop down a circle let's set this to zx plane and maybe I will make  this smaller let's increase the subdivisions and I'll decrease the uniform scale to maybe 0.25  and in this case we can see that we don't have any points on our geometry inside the border so  this is again another good example why sometimes you have to scatter your own point so let's drop  down a scatter from here let's disable relaxation disable max point limit and I will maybe want to  decrease this let's maybe use 50 total point count and from here let's create a velocity attribute so  I will do this with an attribute verb let's rename this to set v and I'll step inside now if I want a  burst type of effect I can create the velocities based on our origin so let's say that we want the  points to scatter from the 0 0 0 coordinate here the center origin all we have to do is simply  subtract our points from this center point so from my p I will do a subtract let's promote this  second input to a constant and let's set this to a triflot if I plug this directly inside the  velocity let's go up and let's create a visualizer for this velocity I'll just simply click on this v  and if I turn on my visualizer let's take a look this is how our velocities look so we can think  of this constant here as just a simple imaginary point that's right in the center of our scene so  if I were to grab the second value here and just drop this down we can see now that we're kind of  moving that imaginary point downwards and now our points will point to the new position of our  imaginary point so we can very easily control our velocity this way so I can just simply adjust  this value however I want now from here again it's best practice to normalize the vector so after  the subtract let's do a normalized so it's one unit length no matter where we subtract the  position from and especially in the case for velocity you will probably want to use normalize  vectors I usually like to affect the strength of the vector at the end so after we do all of our  operations here I just add a multiplier right at the end so I can control the strength of the overall  vector speaking of which let's maybe just introduce some noise to this vector as well so from the  position I will do a turbulent noise let's set this to a 3d noise let's set this to simplex  and I can just simply add this after the normalize plug this here and let's go ahead and increase  the frequency maybe even the roughness in this case and I can increase or decrease the amplitude  to affect this randomness strength now like I said earlier let's go ahead let's say that this is  the vector that I have and now I would like to add a multiplier for strength at the end so let's  drop down a multiplier node let's promote the second input to a parameter so by the way I'm just  middle mouse clicking and choosing whatever operation we want to do here and for the input tool let's  rename this let's set the label here to strength and let's go up and now I can simply like I mentioned  earlier just control the strength of the vectors through this option here let's leave this at 1  and from here an alternative of the visualizer from here if we plug this directly inside a pop net  we will instantly grab the velocities that we have let's maybe first we have to go inside and in  the pop source let's set the emission type here to all points because again we are scattering our  own points and maybe I'll set the display to points and let's disable this guide option so let's  maybe go up at the sub-level and if I press play let's see what we get all right so it's not great  but at least our vectors are moving and now we can tackle each problem one by one the first problem  is that we are emitting again the same set of points for each frame so this is also why we have  this kind of a trail effect because our scatter is the same so in our scatter mode let's go to the  global seed here and I'll change this to a dollar sign ff expression and now each frame again  will have a different scatter and while we are on this subject on our V let's turn back on our  visualizer it would also help if we randomize this noise pattern so to do this we can let's go back  inside and for our noise let's grab the frame and let's create a vector from this so let's do float  to vector and from here we can simply plug this inside the offset and now our noise will also have  a different pattern so this will help with our scatter with our simulation it will be a lot more  chaotic and organic so let's go up and let's disable visualizer and preview the new result  all right so now it's starting to look like an actual kind of explosion effect the second problem  that we have is that I don't want to spawn points throughout the whole simulation so we want to  start removing points from our source over time and I showed you earlier how we can do this by  deleting the points but here since we have access to this scatter node I can simply control the  amount of points we are scattering so I can create a keyframe for the value of 50 at frame 1 and I can  go forward let's go maybe to frame 10 and I'll set a value here to 0 so now after frame 10 we are  no longer spawning any particles and we also have this nice smooth decay over time so back in our  popnet this will be the result that we have now all right so now it's starting to look kind of like  what we are looking for and now since we again are inheriting the velocity I can go in the set  v attribute and I can simply increase the strength so this will be essentially the speed at which  the particles are going so if I set this to a strength of five now our particles are five times  as fast so it's very easy to control this way and notice that we are creating all of these  different kind of results by simply affecting our source so we haven't set anything inside  this top network at all everything was controlled at the sub-level through our sourcing so this is  why it's important that we know how to set up the sourcing now I can either affect the strength  of our velocities here directly on our let's maybe go directly on our source so I can set the  strength here or I'll set this let's just say this to one we can also affect the strength of the  velocity inside so if I step inside if I go to the pop source in the attribute step we have here  is all of the inheriting options that we have so first we can see that we do have initial velocity  this is set to use inherited velocity so this is why we are picking up the velocities that we set  and we have this inherent velocity multiplier so this is exactly like how we had our strength if  I increase this this will now affect the speed of our particles but usually I like to affect the  strength at the sub-level we also have a few more settings here for the inherent velocity we can  also add to inherit velocity so if I set this to a value of one we can introduce our own variants  over here so this just adds randomness in the vectors so if I press play now they are a little  bit more random so if I increase this even more we can see that we are adding more randomness  on top of the vectors that we have again I usually like to set whatever randomness I'm adding at  the sub-level but you also have this option here and we can also give this an initial velocity so  if I set this to zero so we are not inheriting any velocity and let's set all of these to zero we  can also just give this an initial velocity ourself so if I set this to one zero and zero now our  points will go in this direction that we set here again I like to set it on the sub-level just  so I have all the control that I want so let's set this back to using inherited velocity and let's  just set the we'll set this at one and we'll just keep it at the default speed we can also specify  what attributes we want to inherit so for example if I don't want to carry over the color attribute  from the sourcing all I would have to do is use a carrot symbol and then type the attribute  that I don't want to carry over so this carrot symbol over here is what you can use to exclude  something from a list so in this case we are excluding the color attributes for the city  if I didn't want maybe there's a noise attribute so if I don't want to inherit that I would just  use this symbol and type my attribute all right or I can just simply specify I'm not interested in  any of the attributes let's just inherit the V attributes for the velocity so now from the whole  attribute that we have on our source only the V will get carried over let's reset this now I don't  want to just push out particles and have them fly infinitely into space let's also make them fall  so for this we can introduce a gravity node and this is where the forces nodes come in handy so  if I drop down a gravity force I can plug this below the pop solver and I don't know why we have to  place this below our solver as opposed to what we usually do where we place nodes over here in this  chain maybe this is a legacy thing but whatever the case being the gravity is kind of like a source  a force node that has this velocity applied to it so this is the force that we are applying to  our particles so now if I press play our particles are falling down so maybe I can just go in the  pop source and increase the velocity multiplier here and this is what we get all right so now it's  starting to look like an actual burst type of explosion usually in cases like this where we are  trying to imitate kind of like real life it's also it's always worth adding a pop drag as well  so the gravity makes our particles fall down over time and the pop drag will just simply slow down  the particles over time so let's leave the air resistance let's maybe set this to 0.5 and let's  press play so now they start off really fast with their initial speed that we set and they slowly  decrease their speed over time so again this adds more of a natural motion to our particles maybe  this is too strong let's leave this let's just use 0.2 instead so in this case we do want to use  some of the force nodes because we want to apply this slow gradual change to our particles to get  something that kind of mimics what would happen in real life so this is again where the force  nodes might come more in handy and the reason these nodes that are based on force work in this case  is because we are not constantly updating and overriding the velocity so if I were to set the  velocity inside this pop solver with a geometry VOP let's go ahead and let's add a let's add the  geometry VOP here and let's say that I would want to create this velocity inside the inside the  dot net I can just go up and I will disable the velocity over here and I'll just simply grab  this setup that we have I'll grab all of these nodes let's hit control C so we can copy them  and we will just paste them inside this geometry VOP let's rename this to set V and I will paste  them over here and we can see that automatically these are kind of linked already to the position  let's check if this works so I'll plug this in our V let's say that this is what we want to  constantly update our velocity and I'll remove this multiplier here so it's just a unit length of one  and let's see if this float here this float to vector this actually was connected to our time  and the other ones should be fine all right so if I go up if I turn on the visualizer we see again  the node is disabled we can actually just disconnect this from over here so we are creating the same  thing inside the dot net and now the difference will be if I press play we can see that we kind of  have the forces affecting this but the particles are not really affected by the drag and they keep  floating and going indefinitely into space so we are not getting the same result at all and this  is because each frame we are overriding the velocity over here instead of inheriting it so this  is the nature of all simulations when we inherit velocity or where we set velocity directly a velocity  will get carried over from the previous frame and when we apply drag for example let's say I have a  timeline here which starts at frame one and then we have frame two three all right and so on like this  where we have a point that starts maybe on frame three with a certain velocity that's maybe  something like this this will mean now that our point will be updated on frame four it will be maybe  somewhere around this place and we are going to carry over the velocity but since we are applying the  drag and other forces the drag scales down the velocity so this is how the drag works the pop  drag so now our vector will be a little bit smaller than previously and then on the next frame again  it will be smaller and smaller until they completely stop but when we are using a geometry  vop and we are updating our velocity each frame we are no longer reading in this thing because again  in our geometry vop we are normalizing the vector so we will always get one length unit vectors  and our vectors will have the same consistent scale throughout each frame of the simulation or  each step of the simulation so these force nodes will still affect our simulation but again we are  simply overriding the velocity and we are kind of cancelling out their effect so this might be a  little bit confusing to get used to but I hope this makes sense all of this is to say that it's  very important to be mindful when you want to update the velocity inside the solver or simply set  it initially outside the solver like we are doing like we did initially with our setup all right so  let's keep this disconnected and let's step back inside for cases like this there's also a special  attribute in the birth tab already a group this just born group will place our particles inside a  special group that's only on the first frame in which they are born and then on the next frames it  gets removed from this special group so if I said we can give this any name we want let's just  name this born what happens with this group when our particle gets spawned on the one frame 3 for  example it gets placed in this group which exists only on frame 3 so the first frame when they  when the particle is born and so we can set whatever attributes we want when it's in this group so  for example I can again illustrate this with the the velocity let's maybe use a different color  so when I set the velocity and I run the geometry VOP only on this group on the next frame when our  particle is over here it's no longer inside this group and then the geometry VOP will no longer work  so it will simply inherit whatever velocity we set over here so this will kind of mimic what we  are doing when we are setting the velocities on the outside so on our source so each other frame  after the particle is born it's going to have the same velocity vector or whatever attribute we  create for this just born group so this is how this option works and now for example in my geometry  VOP I can set the group over here so I will name this born all right which again all it does it's  essentially set this attribute once just on the first frame and then keep that attribute so we  are no longer overriding it and as a result now if I press play we have the same thing that we  had earlier we can see our forces work as they should and I can simply multiply this let's do  a multiply constant on our velocity set this to a value of 10 so now if I press play we have a  again the same thing that we had earlier now sometimes this is useful to do with this just born  group because you might not have the option to set certain attributes at the solve level over here  like how we did initially so this is where this just born group comes in handy and we have a few more  options here which we will take a look in the next lesson now to better explain what the jitter

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\intro-to-houdini-particles---full-beginner-course\frame_004.jpg

### Interpolate source [93:58]
**Transcript:** birth time and interpolate source do let's set up another example so I'll go up and we'll need  an animated source to better explain this so I'm just gonna go ahead and let's use test geometry  Craig and this comes with animation by default so if I look at this this is how the animation looks  now let's try to spawn particles from the hammer and I'll go forward in time and really I'm  interesting in this portion of the animation where he swings the hammer and we have some speed  so all I'm gonna do here is let's go ahead and in this animation frame let's add set this to  100 or rather add 185 so this will essentially just offset our animation 185 frames  forward so at frame one we start off with this swinging animation so from here let's isolate  the hammer I'll press S and we can simply grab the hammer and I'll press delete and let's delete  non-selected now the thing with Craig is that this comes as a packed geometry so if I look at the  information here or even here we only have one point and we also have this one packed Geo's that  shows up here so we will have to unpack this let's drop down an unpack now packed geometry is a whole  other subject by itself which will cover more in the destruction course but for now all we need to  know is that to access the geometry so now if I press S and press two I can select any point that  I want on this geometry whereas where we have just the packed version if I press S we just have the  one point right so we have to access the geometry and we will have to unpack this and as a side note  if you are importing an Olympic mesh from another software you will probably need to use this unpack  node on that geometry as well anyway now we can also get rid of this handle maybe so I'll just  press S press 4 to go in primitive mode and I will just double click the handle to select the  entire geometry and I'll press delete so we are just left with this part of the hammer and let's  go ahead and from here we can just plug this directly inside a popnet and since the default behavior  of the popnet is to scatter onto surfaces we should now have what we are expecting and maybe I'll  go inside and let's go to the birth tab at another zero here so we are just pointing more points  and we can also turn off guide geometry so let's reset and let's press play and this is what we have  so now for these options here we will look at jitterbarvtime in a second but basically this can be  left at positive for maybe all of the cases the more important setting here will be interpolate source  so notice this word interpolate we can see that currently especially in between the frames where the  hammer is moving fast we are simply placing points exactly where our hammer is on that current  frame so this is why we have this gap between our points so when we set this option let's try  back over here and let's leave this interpolation method to topology now we can see if I reset the  simulation we no longer have this gap between the frames so this will grab the points we have on  the current frame where we are in the simulation and it's going to randomly interpolate those points  back to the previous frame and usually you will want to interpolate the source backwards so if I  let's maybe reset the simulation and let's tap back inside so when we are interpolating backwards we  are looking at the previous frame and if I set this to forward now we are looking one frame after  so we are interpolating to the next frame and this isn't usually what you want usually you want to  leave particles in the trails of an object so in the objects wake so to speak so usually you  will want to use back as an interpolate source option here so again what's happening here is where  we have our hammer in one place and let's say that the hammer is headed in this direction  maybe on the next frame our hammer will be over here so this is the hammer geometry so our points  usually just get scattered throughout a polygon surface like so so we are just scattering in the  same place and what happens when we interpolate is it's going to look at this space this gap between  where our geometry is in a frame compared to the other frame and it's simply going to fill the gap  between those spaces and it's going to randomly place our points to fill this gap so this is  what's happening here now this match topology only works if we have consistent topology from  from frame to frame and there are cases when the topology changes over time so for example  if I look at my geometry we just have the same mesh throughout this entire animation but let's say  that I want to randomly delete parts of this mesh so let's use a group expression node here and  I'll just use one of the presets let's use 30% chance which means that we are going to grab 30%  of the primitives so this is going to create a group for us let's also randomize this selection  per frame so I will just add a seed inside this expression let's do plus at frame so don't worry  about this expression all we are doing here really is selecting random primitives each frame so now  I can do a blast and I will select this group that we created and this is the result that we have  so now our topology will no longer be the same on each frame and if I go to the popnet and  press play we can kind of see some ugly gaps between our interpolation now as opposed to what we  had earlier so if I disable this and reset the simulation we see we have this nice clean trails  on our particles so let's reenable this blast node and reset the simulation so in this case it's  better if we are using the velocity instead to interpolate our source and this is where  our second option comes into play so use point velocity let's go back and we will need  velocity on our geometry source for this and we want to add this velocity before we do our blast  over here so where we have our hammer like so let's go ahead and let's do a trail saw from here  and we will compute velocity so now if I check the point trail display we have our velocity attribute  and this is carried throughout our blast node as well and in our popnet let's we have this option  set to use point velocity and by default if I press play because we are inheriting the velocity  attribute like I mentioned in the earlier example we are pushing away the particle so in this  case I can go to the attributes here and I can just set this inherit velocity to zero so now we  are just using the velocity to interpolate our points now we still have a little bit of gaps and  this is simply because we are removing in fact topology from our particles but we can see that we  have a better result than when we are using the match topology option in this case so if I go up  and reset we can kind of see a little bit of a nastier result here because again we are removing  topology so it's not consistent from frame to frame so this is where this use point velocity  option comes comes in handy now there's really a lot that goes into sourcing and interpolation  and inheriting attributes and I also have a separate video that goes more in depth about how to  best handle interpolation and how to fix any particle stepping that you may encounter so I will  highly recommend checking that video out to get a better understanding on interpolating the source.

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\intro-to-houdini-particles---full-beginner-course\frame_005.jpg

### Collisions [102:31]
**Transcript:** Finally let's talk about collisions and we'll do another example for this let's start again  with a circle and let's let's set this to zx plane and let's also make this smaller increase the  divisions here and let's start to scatter some points drop down is scatter and again the same  things that we did earlier let's go ahead and change the global seed type the dollar ff expression  here and we'll keep this at a thousand all right so we have a random seed per frame now we can use  a attribute of opt to create some velocities like we did earlier but there's a pre-build node that  Houdini set up for us that does pretty much the same thing so we can use a point velocity here  and let's set this initialization to set to a value and we'll use 0, 1 and 0 so this creates the  velocity vector if I turn on the visualizer here is the vector that we have and we can give this  any direction that we want let's just keep this straight up and we also have a very handy  curly noise tab option here so if I turn this on we can just use this to create our noise I'll  scale this down and also the swirl size and maybe increase the grain so kind of the same thing  that we did earlier but we're just using a pre-build node to do all of this and we can see that this is  also animated by default because this animated option is turned on so this is perfect so again all  of this we can build our cells in a attribute vault but sometimes when you want to work fast and  brainstorm some ideas I like to use these pre-build nodes just so I can work fast but as a beginner I  would really encourage you to use Vops as much as you can to get used to working with them and when  you're a little bit more advanced then you can take the shortcuts and use some of these pre-build nodes  but it's important to note how to reach these results yourselves rather than relying on the  nodes that Houdini set up for us anyway from here we can do a transform node and I will attach this  to the point velocity and now if I press enter I can use the handle and I can move my source around  but if I rotate my points you can see that the velocities rotate with them so this is a very cool  feature of the transform node and I can even if I press E to get my scale tool I can even scale this  and now I can affect the strength of these vectors so I can make these particles go faster by  just increasing the scale of this vector like so or I can do some really interesting things so  this transform node is very powerful and this is happening because we see in the attributes tab  over here this is affecting all of our attributes so this is what this star symbol is doing it's  it's applying this transform operation for all of our values so for example if I just wanted to  affect our position I can set this list here I can just type P so now we can see that even though  we are rotating around our points our velocities point in the same direction so sometimes if you don't  want to affect the other attributes you can just specify that you just want the position but I'll  set this back to star so we can affect the attributes as well and I don't want to affect the scale let's  set this to 11 and 1 but I will move this to the side let's reset these values I just want to push  this over to the side like so and just rotate this maybe 90 degrees horizontally like so so they're  pushing the particles will push in this direction so a lot of things you can do with this transform node  a lot of times I like to create my sources and attributes already vectors at the origin so at the  center of my scene and then just simply move them around or use a copy to point if I want the  vectors to follow a certain a certain point or source over time and there's a lot of tricks that  you can do but I just wanted to show you what you can get out of the transform node so let's  disable the visualizer we'll spawn particles that go over to the side and let's create a simple sphere  in the center here I'll just add this sphere and keep the default settings as they are and from  here let's also add a null and let's say that this will be our collision so let's type here  sphere collision and let's create our popnet so from my transform for my sources let's drop down  a pop network let's step inside and because we are scattering our own points we'll set the  emission to all points and disable guide let's press play and we have our particles and everything  is working as expected maybe this noise is a little bit too strong let's go back to the strength  fear and I'll scale this down I just want to introduce a little bit of noise all right so we have  our sphere at the solve level let's go ahead and control C on this null to copy this and I will  go inside and the way we add collisions is with a static object so let's drop down this static  object from our list so here it is and we'll just simply point our stop path to our sphere so I  will paste the path to the sphere collision null over here and now to add this in our chain we  have to add the collision objects after our solver so whether this is a pop solver or valum solver  or any other kind of solver we will have to add this after the solver so the collisions to add  the collisions we have to use a merge node which is a little bit weird to be honest but merge inside  dot network means collisions basically so if I plug this over here we see our sphere now showing so  it's part of our chain but we will have to reverse the order here so the default relationship is  left input effects right inputs so we have to go from left to right with this merge node selected  I can press shift R to reverse the order or I can use this list here to drag my objects  in the order that I want so I usually prefer using shift R to just reverse the order so now the  object is on the left the collision object and our particles are on the right so this is what you  usually want and if I disable the visualizer and press play we should have our collisions working  already so this is what we have let's maybe go up and I'll go to my source and drag this over  closer to my sphere and maybe I'll make this sphere a little bit bigger like so all right so let's  reset and this is what we have so we already have some behavior from our collisions let's step  back inside and let's look at our static object in the physical tab we have some properties that  we can play around with here so bounds will push our particles back if I set this to zero and reset  we can see now that some particles get stuck in the center of our sphere but some particles continue  to slide across the sphere so this is what this bounds forward will do if this is zero as well and  I press play then our particles are simply sticking to the sphere with bounds forward and the  regular bounds if I set this to the default of 0.5 now depending on the angle at which they  heat the sphere they will either bounce backwards or bounce forward so if I were to go in Photoshop  for a second let's say that this is the sphere and we have a particles let's say that our source  is over here for our particles if the particle is moving like so and it's kind of perpendicular  to the surface this will make our particle bounce backwards and also preserving this angle and  when the particle is sort of on the tangent of the source of the surface so let's say that maybe  one of the particles goes something like this so we have a bigger angle on our reflection because  this is basically what's happening our particles will then be allowed to bounce forward like so and  we see that we have a really big angle for this reflection thing that's happening now don't worry  too much about this just note that if it's really if it's hitting the surface perpendicularly it will  probably bounce back and when it's hitting the surface at an angle it will use the bounce forward  option so this is why if I set this bounce to zero and I leave the bounce forward at one we can  see some particles are traveling forward and some particles in the center here are stuck these are  the particles that would have gotten the the bounce backwards so when I set this to 0.5 this is how  they are bouncing in the opposite side and some of the particles that are hitting more the sphere  at an angle they will receive more of this bounce forward and now friction is how sticky the  particles are to the surface let's maybe set the bounce to zero so we only have more of the bounce  forward effect the friction will determine how sticky they are to the surface so if I set this  to a high value now they will pretty much completely stick to the surface and if I set this to a low  value so if this is zero then they will just completely slide off of the surface and they are  being taken care of by these bounce forward now so depending on what kind of behavior you want you  will need to adjust all of these parameters and dynamic friction scale when the particle is already  sliding this will add a little bit of friction on that sliding motion of the particle so as the  particle slides more across the surface it tends to get more sticky so from what I understand this  is what the dynamic friction scale does and temperature is something to do with fluid simulation so you  don't need to worry about this for now but I kind of never use this either way so don't worry  about the setting now all of these settings usually you'll just have to play around with an  experiment even if you know what they do you'll probably need different settings depending on  the effect that you're after so usually you'll have to go back and forth with these values until  you get the right behavior let's maybe just set the friction to 0.5 and we'll keep these settings as  they are should be okay let's go in the collisions tab and here we have a few important settings to  look into this collision detection is said to use solver default and we can choose whether we want  to use volume collisions or surface collisions now generally in most cases I would recommend that  you use volume collisions volume collisions are super fast and you can get pretty accurate results  and with volumes when you turn a collision object into a volume you don't have to worry about multiple  layers of geometries so for example if I go up and if I drop the test geometry Tommy object and take a  look at him we have this character and this mesh is made up of multiple meshes so if I look at my  shirt I can delete this and we can see again that he's made up of multiple objects so if we are using  surface collisions this can get a little bit messy but when we turn this mesh into a volume so if we  do VDB from polygons and I decrease the voxel size here everything is kind of packed together so  you don't have to worry about having multiple meshes everything is just combining to one mesh so  that's one of the reasons why this is powerful and the other reason is that it's just simply faster  to calculate than regular collisions so again I will just use volume collisions in maybe most cases  so when this is set to volume collisions let's turn off display geometry and let's turn on the  collision guide this will automatically create a volume for us with this default mode of ray intersect  so here we can adjust the resolution we can see that as I lower this we have lower and lower  resolution volume and we can increase the uniform divisions to get a more accurate representation but  what I like to do here is create my own volume at the sub level and then use that volume inside  the collision so what I'll do is go up and from my sphere let's turn this into a assigned distance  field so an SDF so we know from intro to volumes what an SDF is and how to create it so if you want  to know more about volumes I really recommend taking that course as well let's do a VDB from  polygons from here and for SDF we'll keep this at surface and we will want to fill interior so  it's important that we have this option on when we want to do collisions and now in the voxel size  we can just decrease this to increase the resolution maybe I'll give the sphere more topology as well  let's set the primitive type to polygon and I'll just increase the frequency so if I go back  we will use this volume as collision so let's go back inside the popnet and let's use for mode  let's use volume sample and now in the proxy volume path over here we will have to point this to  our object so let's go up and let's grab our sphere collision again control C and let's paste the  path here inside the proxy volume and when we have this option turned on we can in fact get read of  the sub path over here so we don't really need this we can see that as I remove this we still have  our volume showing so now if I press play which we can see everything is happening now we can leave  the sub path to point to our volume as well so I'll just paste the sphere collision here mainly  because I want to turn off the collision guide and we want to display the geometry so if I reset  the simulation we can see the geometry as well and this is why we can use the sub path as well  but the collision will look at the proxy volume over here so this is the important path that we  need to specify all right so if I press play we see the collision is working and now if we had  if we were working with an animated object let's go up and let's go to our sphere let's drop down  a mountain node from here all right and let's also turn on animation for this so if I look at the  animation now we have this moving geometry so now our VDB will be recalculating each frame and if I go  in the popnet we will need to specify to use the forming geometry so now this will force our  static object to grab whatever we are having at the sub level so this will now update as well  so if I press play we can see that everything works as it should now the cool part about using an  SDF is that for example some of the time you might want to smooth out the surfaces on which the  particles are colliding so after the VDB from polygons I can also do a VDB smooth SDF and this is  kind of like a blur over the volume as we can see we can increase the iterations so we can smooth  out the surface a little bit and this will enable our particles to slide a little bit easier and maybe  if we have points where our particles are sticking to the object we can smooth out the surfaces again  to ensure that they keep sliding or they have an easier time sliding so this is sometimes useful  and we can also offset where we want the collisions to happen so we can also use a VDB reshape  SDF and we can set this to either dilate or erode so we can see that with this if I template my  sphere on top let's template the result with the mountain if I push this I can kind of push  this in a little bit if I don't have the most accurate collisions and now if I look at my sphere  and also look at the particles this is the result that we will get so maybe I want the volume in  this case to be further out than our sphere geometry so I would set this to dilate instead so I'll  push out the volume slightly let's look at our result now okay and also we notice that when I  look at the popnet result we are previewing the collision as well and this is because by default  inside this object merge we are bringing in all the objects so if I look inside the pop object  this means that we are bringing in the pop object so our particles and also our collision  object as well so if I want I can just import the pop object so I can go up and I can say that I  only want to bring the pop object so this will get rid of the collisions and now I can preview  the geometry before we turn it into a volume and this is the result that we get all right so we can  see that with a moving geometry this is a little bit slower to simulate and this is also because  all of these settings that we are doing over here so when we are turning the geometry into a volume  and then running the smooth and then the reshape these are slowing down our process overall so if I  look at my collision result we can see that this collision object is running rather slow we are  just having maybe 7 FPS over here so what we can do to optimize things is we can actually cache this  entire volume so we can do a file cache and let's just save out 100 frames and I will save to this  so now we are saving the entire sequence to this and reading it from this and if I play the  simulation now we can see that we are running in real time so 24 FPS and now this will translate to  our popnet so if I look at my simulation now we can see that it's running actually in real time  so this is much faster so it's always worth spending extra time optimizing your simulations however  you can and always remember that if your sources are slow so if I were to preview my particle source  and if I were to play this and have a slow loading time or slow playback for the source this will  translate over to the simulation as well so again it's always important to be mindful of the sources  for the particle source and the collision as well and optimize things wherever you can so like I said  we are gonna talk more about collisions in the other courses as well and this was a brief introduction  to collisions and hopefully you know enough to get started now so we've reached the end of our

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\intro-to-houdini-particles---full-beginner-course\frame_006.jpg

### Conclusion [121:21]
**Transcript:** course and I really hope this was helpful I will admit that some of the techniques and workflows that  I've shown might be a little bit more advanced not really suited for complete beginners but like  I mentioned I don't really want you to waste time learning the shortcuts and the pre-built way that  Houdini offers us I would much rather you learn the proper workflow and the proper techniques  from the beginning and sort of rewire your brain into working more with VOPs so whether  it's at the sub-level or at the top level I hope by now that you understand that it's really  the better way of working and it's what's going to allow you to not hit walls all the time and  really progress the furthest in the long game so this was pretty much it thank you for watching  if you want to see how I use particle simulations in real world projects you can check out my pro courses  on VauxSight.com more courses are coming so stay tuned

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\intro-to-houdini-particles---full-beginner-course\frame_007.jpg


---

## Structured Notes

### Core Technique
[PENDING EXTRACTION]

### Summary
[PENDING EXTRACTION]

### Key Steps
[PENDING EXTRACTION]

### Houdini Nodes / VEX / Settings
[PENDING EXTRACTION]

### Difficulty
[PENDING EXTRACTION]

### Houdini Version
[PENDING EXTRACTION]

### Tags
[PENDING EXTRACTION]

---

## Related Tutorials
[PENDING EXTRACTION]
