---
title: Introduction to Particles in Houdini 21 [FULL Beginner Course 2026]
source: YouTube
url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=041qemBc_1Q
author: Pixel In The Frame
ingested: 2026-06-23
houdini_version: "H21 / any modern (H19+)"
tags: [particles, pop, pop-solver, pop-force, pop-vop, pop-wrangle, collisions, instancing, karma, solaris, lops, motion-blur, beginner-intermediate]
extraction_status: complete
frames_dir: tutorials/frames/introduction-to-particles-in-houdini-21-full-beginner-course-2026/
frame_count: 22
---

# Introduction to Particles in Houdini 21 [FULL Beginner Course 2026]

**Source:** [YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=041qemBc_1Q)
**Author:** Pixel In The Frame
**Duration:** 165m26s | 22 section(s)

---

## Raw Data (for Claude Code extraction)


### Introduction [0:00]
**Transcript:** In this course, I will show you how to work with particles in Goudini.  We will cover a lot of different topics from pop solver to pop forces, volume add  action, instant scene techniques and much more.  Let's start.

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\introduction-to-particles-in-houdini-21-full-beginner-course-2026\frame_000.jpg

### POP Source [0:22]
**Transcript:** To do a particle system in Goudini, you should create geometry, go inside, hit up and type  pop network.  It will create for you dope network with basic nodes needed for particle simulation.  If you will hit play button now, you will see that nothing happening, simply because  we didn't set up any meter for particle system.  To fix that, we should set up a meter itself.  As you see now, a mission type we have scatter onto surface, so we need a geometry as  an input and geometry source is the first input of pop network.  So let's go up to solve level and create a sphere after that connected to first input  of pop net.  I will move sphere up.  And now if we hit play, we can see that particles start scattering onto surface of the sphere.  We have a checkbox for guide geometry.  We just create a ghosting wireframe so you can see where is your emitter.  Let's create a gravity force node.  As you see, it's pointing downward, there is 9.8 value.  And if we start playing now, the particles start moving down.  Next mission type, if we click on drop down menu, would be all points.  Basically, sourcing will happen from every point of our input geometry on every substep  of simulation.  And as you see, if we start playing simulation, it's constantly meeting from every point  on every substep.  Next mission type is all geometry, so basically it's taken geometry and on every substep,  we'll start injecting into particle simulation.  Item type points is basically taking and scattering randomly scattering points onto points  of input geometry.  I will choose scatter onto surface and now we can check the different geometry source options.  Besides choosing the input of pop network, you can set parameter instead, set a pass  to your node.  With case you should choose from drop down menu in geometry source parameter, use parameter  values and simply copy pass of emitter node and paste it into salt parameter.  With mission type, scatter onto surface, we have a source group parameter and it gave  an option to choose polygons, where emissions should happen.  Let's go up to salt level and select couple of polygons.  After that press tap in viewboard and create group from selected area.  Let's change group name to meter, go inside pop network and choose a meter group.  And now particles emitting only from the polygons which inside emitter group, I will remove  the group and now we can check parameter called emission attribute.  Here we can select point attribute, what will control emission amount of particles.  Once jumped to salt level, I will change primitive type to polygon for the sphere and increase  frequency to have more points.  Disable group node and create attribute warp, diamond side, create turbulent noise, black  position and output of the noise I would like to color.  So we can easily see the appearance of the noise.  When it's ready, I'll create bind export to export attribute.  Let's create bind export, and now we can go back to pop network and choose emit attribute  in emission attribute parameter.  I'll disable gravity for now, so we can easily see the places where it's emitted from.  And as you see, now this attribute is working for the probability of emission.  Alright, let's remove it.  And before we go to burst up, let's check parameter called remove overlapping.  To show how it's working, I will switch emission type to all points, hit play and display  point numbers.  So now you can see that every time step points create in the same position and it's  leading to assume that we have overlapping particles.  Basically, this parameter help us to remove such points and make simulation lighter.  Just choose from drop down menu, this existing, and that's it.  Now time to go to burst up.  This type responsible for emission amount, source and activation and particle lifespan.  If they have emission type all points, they have only one option for activation is to be  active or not active.  The probability of one equal to active and value zero will deactivate the meter.  And in that case, we can put expression or animate by hand.  The keyframes, let's enable gravity back.  For example, let's set expression $f equal to 10.  What means that in frame 10, source will emit particles.  Now we can check different emission type.  Let's remove expression and set activation to 1, change emission type to scatter onto  surface.  This type have and constant and impulse activation options.  I will set constant burst rate to 5000.  What means that source will emit 5000 particles per second?  You can animate constant emission as well.  For example, we can set expression $f less than 10, which means activation will happen  before frame 10.  Maximum scene points, it's limit for particles for this network.  So if particles amount exceed this number, new particles will be not created.  Maximum points per frame, it's limit for the amount of particles emitted per one frame.  Just born group.  Here you can put a name for the group.  What will include just born particles for same subset.  And then they will be removed from that group.  Let's put a name for the group just born.  Go up and create a split node to use a lay just born group from mainstream.  And now you can see that this group contain only just born particles on their first frame.  Set parameter give random value for particle distribution.  If expectancy, it's a lifespan of particles in seconds.  So if I set one, it means the particle will leave for one second or 24 frames.  It depends on your animation settings, but by default, goodini set FPS to 24.  As well, you can use live variance to add varity to lifespan of particles.  And here as well set in seconds.  So this amount will be subtracted or added to live expectancy value.  Now we can go to attribute step.  Here you can choose what attributes particles should inherit from the meter and set initial  velocity.  By default, initial velocity set to use inherit velocity.  What means when particle born, it will look into source geometry for velocity attribute.  But we don't have it.  So let's create it.  Let's go back to solve level and create point velocity node.  I will click on add velocity checkbox and set three in y axis.  Let's display point trails and it shows that now we have velocity attribute.  Go back to pop network.  And if you start playing our simulation, you will see that particle start moving up.  And now we parameter and hered velocity.  We can control scale often heredit velocity as well.  We can add to inherited velocity.  So it will use velocities from source geometry plus additional values.  What we can set here.  Let's disable point velocity node.  And now we can check last option set initial velocity where you can set vector for initial  velocity of the particles.  Checkbox add ide attributes is very important.  It's turned on by default and it should stay like that because particles basically it's  a point.  We have point numbers but because particles dying over time, it means that point number  for them will be changed.  And ide attribute gives consistent unique number to every particle.  So later we can easily manipulate on them.  Stream top.  Here you can find name of the group where particles from that source will be added to.  By default here's expression dollar OS.  So basically it's reading the name of the node.  And using it as a name of the group after stream underscore.  It will be very helpful if you have couple of sources and later you can split them.  Let's duplicate pop source node.  Go to solve level, duplicate sphere and move it to site and connect it to second input  of pop network.  Now in the source tab of second pop source node we should choose use second context geometry.  And now we have two sources and since the name of source node is different it will add  particles from different sources to different groups.  Now we can go up and in split node choose one of stream groups.  That's how we can easily access later particles from different sources.  Let's remove second source and now time to speak about pop solver.

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\introduction-to-particles-in-houdini-21-full-beginner-course-2026\frame_001.jpg

### POP Solver [10:16]
**Transcript:** I will set initial velocity to zero and set constant activation to one.  Unveil gravity and increase its value a lot until I start to see a sub step issue in  the viewboard.  Alright, as you see we have these gaps between particles.  It's coming because of sub step issue because particle travel too fast.  To solve that we can go up and in simulation type of dog network we can increase global  sub step value.  Now as you see the particle stream gets rid of these gaps between particles.  These here with this method would be that you force dog network constantly do same amount  of extra sub steps.  So let's speak how we can do it adaptively to optimize calculations.  Go inside and select op solver.  In here you will see minimum and maximum sub steps parameters.  And CFO condition is basically threshold which helps to understand solver what amount  of sub steps it should apply.  It takes into account particle travel distance.  Let's set maximum sub steps to 11 and as you see now nothing happens.  It's because to make it work we should have a p-scale attribute on particles.  P-scale is a common points or particle attribute in goodini which determine a size of the  point of particle.  Let's create p-scale attribute.  Go up and create attribute create node.  Set name to p-scale and value to 1.  Let's split the bottom viewboard and open geometry spreadsheet window where we can browse  all attributes information.  Now as you see we have p-scale attribute and its value equal to 1.  Go back to simulation and if we click play now we will see that stop step start working.  If you want you can decrease CFO condition to make solver be more sensitive to travel distance.  Update top allow us to choose basic option of solver.  Basically you should just keep it as it is.  In collision behavior top as well we should do nothing.  We will speak about collisions later.  But here you can set defaults for response on collision, should particle diodes, tickles  light and disable collisions if you need as well and choose which attributes you want  to be added to particles on collision.  Let's talk about sleeping top.  You can't turn on outer sleep it means that particles with low velocities below the  velocity threshold will be put to sleep.  It's controlling by stopped attribute and I'll show you now how you can work with this  stopped attribute to control activation of particles.  Let's go up to solve level and create a box.  In size create points from volume node to scatter points inside of box.  Connected to first input of pop network.  In pop source choose all points and set expression $f equal 1 to meet particles only in first  frame.  Disable gravity and adjust life expectancy to higher value.  If I enable outer sleep and go to geometry spreadsheet to check attributes.  We will see that now we have stopped attribute applied.  Now it's equal to 1, what means that particle is deactivated now.  And if I enable gravity back you see that it's not affecting these particles.  Let's try to activate some of them.  We can do it in different ways for now I will show you how to do it with group.  Let's create pop group node.  We will talk about this node in details later.  Choose name for group I will write activate.  Go to bounding tab and click enable.  Switch bounding type to sphere adjust size and position.  Now it can animate sphere in a way it going through the particles.  To set animation keyframe you should hold alt and click on parameter.  Then go to frame 74 adjust new position and set keyframe again.  Now we have bounding sphere which goes through the particles and all particles which inside  these bounding sphere will go to group activate.  Now we should create new node called pop wrangle.  It allows us to use vx expression to manipulate attributes.  Again we will talk later about it in details.  Now I just want to show you how working attribute stopped connected after pop group and put  expression if group activate equal to 1 then attributes stopped equal to 0 which means  the particle will become active again.  Play animation and you will see that particles inside of group activate start be active  and gravity can influence them.  Alright that's how stopped attribute working.  Now let's start from scratch.  Let's remove all nodes create a grid and pop network.  Go inside create gravity.  Before we start to speak about pop nodes I forgot to mention one important parameter in pop  solver called timescale.  Basically it's simulation speed and it will set its particles interact in fast or slow.  This parameter also can be animated.  Let's set couple keyframes to prove it.  It can be very helpful when you like overall forces and motion in your particle system  but just want to make it slower or faster.  Delete animation.  First node I want to talk about will be pop color.

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\introduction-to-particles-in-houdini-21-full-beginner-course-2026\frame_002.jpg

### POP Color [17:18]
**Transcript:** Press stop and create pop color node.  This node will create the attribute for particles which mean color diffuse and first color type  what you can see is constant so basically you apply it to every particle same color.  You can choose any color you want in color editor.  Next color type is random.  It assign random color based on particle ID to every particle.  So as you see we have a little Vax expression and you have a seed parameter so basically  you can change random distribution if you don't like original one.  Next color type is ramp.  As you see in Vax expression it uses normalized h so basically it takes h attribute and  divided by life of the particle.  In this case values will be between 0 and 1 so it can easily feed the ramp and you will  have a better control over it.  By default particle life is really huge number is 100 seconds.  Let's set it to 1 so we can easily check how ramp is working.  Now you can see when particles born we have one color and it's black.  In the end of this life it's moving to white color.  You can change flag position or add new flag.  These different colors if you want you can control the range in range parameter and if  you click on gear you can choose different presets of color ramp.  Next type is blend.  It's blending between two values, between two colors.  You can use a blend ramp to control which color will apply and as you see again in Vax  expression the ramp based on normalized h but you can feed any parameter you would like  to.  Same you can set a minimum and maximum value for range.  It's neat for example when your attribute what you use to control it have specific numbers.  Next type is alpha.  Basically it's a positive of particles.  If alpha equal to 1 it means that particle is fully a pack and if alpha is 0 the particle  is transparent.  As well you can control it with ramp.  Again in Vax expression we can see it's normalized h so we can move around the flag  position and we will see that some particles become transparent.  We can reverse the ramp so particle becomes transparent to the end of its life.  Alright now time to speak about pop group.

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\introduction-to-particles-in-houdini-21-full-beginner-course-2026\frame_003.jpg

### POP Group [20:16]
**Transcript:** First let's disable alpha update and let's go back to color tab and set color to 0 so  it means it black.  And press top and create pop group node.  In group name parameter set name red it will be the name of particle group and duplicate  pop color in the second pop color node set color to red.  So now we can copy name of the group or choose it in group parameter of pop color second  node.  So now every particle in group red will have red color.  Let's go to pop group node and enable group.  We default it put all particles inside this group and now we can play with different settings.  Let's disable group by rule and go to second top where we can group particles by bounding  object click on enable and choose bounding sphere.  Here we can change the size of the sphere.  If I hit play we can see that all particles inside of sphere become red because they added  to red group.  And as you see when particles leaving bounding sphere it's again become black because first  pop color node always working.  It means we should apply black color only when particle just born to do that we should go  to pop source node and in just born group parameter set group name let's let's be new  PT.  And now we should choose that group in pop color first node let's choose it.  So basically the black color will assign only on first frame and after that it will continue  to have red color even if it leave bounding sphere later.  We can play around we can move around the sphere and as you see the particle preserve the  red color if it was once inside of sphere.  We can even animate the bounding sphere.  Okay I will delete animation and now we can go to next top called random.  So basically by default behaviors add to group so it's randomly adding particles to this  group.  So we can change the chance basically percentage and see it to change random distribution.  The second type of behavior is removed from group to see how it works I will use combination  of two conditions for now I disable random go to bounding tab enable it and let's go  to pop source node and use impulse activation stat I'll increase impulse count to 10,000  go back to pop group slightly increase size of body sphere go back to random and enable  it.  So as you see now the random remove from group type behavior will help us to subtract  some particles from that group.  Let's enceit parameters working the same way.  Right now time to go to combine top here we can do different combinations on groups.  Let's set up another pop group.  Let's call it red underscore box go to bounding tab enable bounding box and move it to left  side and sphere will keep it right side go to first pop group node and now we can choose  group red equals to red and choose union with group red box.  So basically when we apply this you will see that now the particles what inside of red  box group united with group red.

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\introduction-to-particles-in-houdini-21-full-beginner-course-2026\frame_004.jpg

### Instancing Geometry [25:06]
**Transcript:** Now we can speak about instancing let's delete all notes what we have except of basic  one.  I switch back to constant activation and create pop instance node.  As you see here we have instance pass parameter so basically we need to provide pass to instance  geometry.  I'll create a sphere choose primitive type to polygon and frequency to one and now I copy  this node and paste it into instance pass parameter.  So to reference to sphere and as you see now we have this wireframe display inside  of ubert and if you middle click on pop solver you'll see that this node create instance  pass string attribute to show what it have.  I'll split viewport and change to geometry spreadsheet.  Let's hide all attributes except of instance pass and as you see this attribute contain  the full pass to instance geometry in our case it's sphere.  So that's how it's finding the proper instance mesh.  But if we go back to sub level as you see we don't have even wireframe display let's import  and clean away particles into sub.  I'll create dope input field drag and drop pop net into dope network choose pop object  and then in presets choose particles.  So now if we change display to dope input field we'll see only particles and now let's  create instance node.  So you see by default instance attribute set to instance pass and when we display the  instance we see our instance geometry correctly.  Now we have same size for all particles let's adjust it I create attribute randomized  and in attribute name I set p scale p scales responsible for particle size.  So as you see now we have different size for each particle.  I'll decrease amount of particles to 5 and as you see the problem now that  size of particles is changing when some of particles dying because particle number is  jumping for them.  That's why we need to use ID attribute to assign p scale attribute.  So let's go to options and click on sit attribute by default it's already set to ID now size  will be consistent.  Second option to instance geometry is copy to points node.  Let's go inside of pop net and increase constant burst rate to 500.  I'll mute instance node and create copy to points.  Plug to first input sphere and to second one particles and as you see now this fear is  copying onto particles.  By the way I forgot to mention that pop instance by default give you path geometry.  So basically if you want to operate on it later you should create unpack node and then  you will see full primitive count of geometry.  Alright let's go back to copy to points.  Here as well you have an option to create path geometry if you need to save memory you  can click on pack an instance and you will see now we have only 498 pack geometry.  So basically same amount how much particles we have but what if we want to use a library  of several geometries to copy onto particles.  In that case let's create couple more geometries I'll create the box  and create lab cylinder or if you don't have lab since all you can use a tube because  cylinder is a Android node in coordinate center I'll create transform node and click on  move centroid to origin.  Now time to create merge and merge all 3 geometries.  And reconnect copy to points.  Now as you see all 3 meshes copy on every particle so basically we need to use some attribute  to understand which geometry goes to which particle.  For that I'll create attribute from pieces node.  First input its particles and second input should be geometries but as you see the name  attribute is zero right now it's because we need to create first the name attribute  for every geometry what we have.  I'll do it with a sample node it automatically creates a name attribute.  If you'll check the primitives in spreadsheet we'll see name attribute and every close  geometry have a different name.  Select attribute from pieces and switch to points in geometry spreadsheet.  As you see now we have proper name on points and we can choose mold how the name will  apply so it can be random and can be cycle and so on.  We can even middle click and display name attribute and viewport so you see each point  have different value.  Let's connect attribute from pieces to second input of copy to points.  And first input connect to a sample.  As you see it's still not assigned just because we need to click on piece attribute name  and now every point have different geometry.  Let's move on and speak about pop force.

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\introduction-to-particles-in-houdini-21-full-beginner-course-2026\frame_005.jpg

### POP Force, POP Wind, POP Drag, POP Wind Shadow [32:09]
**Transcript:** I'll delete all nodes except of basic one.  Increase constant burst rate to 15,000 and live expectancy to 3 so particles will live  longer, press stop and create pop force.  Please note allow us to add force directional and turbulence.  So let's set force in X equal to 10 so as you see now we have diagonal motion and if  we increase amplitude of noise to 10 we start to see some turbulence value.  Once decrease force to 3 and change subtle size for noise.  Settle scale help us to scale force in each axis separately.  Last length the duration of lowest frequency animation.  Roughness is scale for each new iteration of noise.  High values will give you bigger jitter in motion and lower values will give you smooth  behavior.  Atinuation responsible for noise atinuation exponent and turbulence is level of detail.  Usually you will use values between 1 and 5.  Let's create pop wind node.  It looks very similar to pop force.  One difference it has a resistance attribute and wind speed.  So this node is tricky because when you create it as you see amplitude for noise is 0  and with velocity 0 as well but this node still will affect your simulation because  a resistance parameter set at 1 and it basically operates as a drug force.  You can see difference in velocities if you start playing with a resistance when it increases  parameter you will see that particles move slower and if you decrease it they move faster  so just keep it in mind.  But if you have any value in noise or wind velocity, the resistance will be responsible for  the germine influence of these node forces to particle simulation.  Let's set noise amplitude to 5, subtle size 29.3 and wind velocity to 10 in X and you  see if you play with wind speed.  This basically works as a multiplier for directional wind.  If you increase it you will see that there is much more directionality in the motion.  As well here like in other pop nodes we can use Vax expression to control every parameter  we will speak on it later.  But for now I will delete this pop wind and pop force and create new pop wind and let's  check how we can work with multiple pop wind nodes.  I will set wind velocity in Z20 and amplitude of noise to 3 or even maybe 5 increase  subtle size and increase air resistance to 10.  I will disable gravity for now so we can have only wind affect the particle motion.  I will duplicate the wind with exact same settings.  Only one thing that I will change is direction will be opposite for the first wind.  I will put minus for Z value.  And as you see now both of them compensating each other because air resistance parameter  is the same.  So let's set first pop wind to 20 and you will see that now it start prevail until  we set the same value for second pop wind.  Now if we create a pop drag you will see that this node has wind velocity sent to 0  and air resistance to 1 which means it works like drag node and if now we plug it after  both winds and increase air resistance you will see that it's basically the drag the  simulation down until we set any value in with velocity.  If you set to 5 it start affecting like a separate force and air resistance basically  control the influence of this force.  And if I set wind velocity in Y and get back to 0 you will see it become again the drag  force.  Okay, let's delete them, enable by gravity and go up to soft level.  Move grid higher.  I will set it goes to influx to it and create sphere.  Scale it a bit.  Move it to left.  I'll click to set key for center parameter.  Go to frame 55 and move sphere to right and click again to set new key frame.  Then hold shift and shift animation to start later.  So we have our sphere moving through the cloud of particles.  Go back to pop network and create pop wind shadow.  And this node should go immediately after pop wind node.  But before that I will connect sphere to third input and after sphere I will create point  velocity to calculate velocity for the moving sphere.  I'll choose display trails and viewboards so you can see we have velocity and change velocity  approximation to central difference.  Okay, now as you see nothing happened simply because we don't have pop wind node.  Let's press top and create pop wind before pop wind shadow.  That's that wind directional velocity to 10 in Z axis.  Even maybe two.  Okay, two is good.  Oh, actually maybe even one.  NSUC.  Now we have portion of particles moving in direction of motion of the sphere.  Let's add some turbulence.  Increase serial size.  And if we now click play, you'll see some particles in haired sphere velocities.  Now create transform node and move sphere slightly up.  Okay, cool.  Here we have couple parameters like great direction can be relative in the opposite direction  of wind velocity or can go in opposite direction of the wind and can be aligned with particle  velocity.  Effect existing mask parameter gives you options what to do if you already have a mask  in particle simulation.  As well it can control maximum distance from object.

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\introduction-to-particles-in-houdini-21-full-beginner-course-2026\frame_006.jpg

### POP Awaken [40:57]
**Transcript:** Now let's keep only emitter grid surface and check another method how we can activate  particles.  I will move down grid to zero and remove both wind nodes.  Let's keep gravity and I rest up and create pop awakening.  This node will help us to activate or deactivate particles.  First let's create attribute create node and set stop attribute set value to one.  So basically all particles is deactivated.  And now I click on option awakened by volume.  We can choose how we want to set up a pasta object.  I'll create a sphere and we'll animate scale of it.  So I'll click in first frame and I'll click in frame 54.  So the sphere will scale over time.  We'll create VDB from polygons and check field interior.  Go back to pop net and paste the pass to the sphere volume.  Alright, as you see now sphere grows our particles become awakened and you can choose actually  from drop down menu what option you want to use.  We can put it to sleep so it's opposite action.  But in that case we should disable stopped attribute in attribute create.  Okay, let's go back to awakened.  And as you see now we have these artifact points which start on first frame falling.  Even sphere is not grown to this positions.  So to fix that let's create a pop group.  Let's call it activate.  And choose in bounding tab option bounding type bounding volume and set the pass to VDB  from polygons node.  And now we should choose where pop awakened node activate group.  And now as you see it's working correctly.  It's activating only in the area where we have the activation volume.

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\introduction-to-particles-in-houdini-21-full-beginner-course-2026\frame_007.jpg

### POP Axis Force [43:54]
**Transcript:** Now let's check pop axis force node.  I will disable for now pop group and pop awakened and disable until create rest up and type  pop axis.  Alright, these nodes apply forces around axis.  As you see now particles start to spin around center of the sphere as well we can change  type to torus.  Let's go back to sphere and I will increase the height of the force.  And increase lift speed.  So torus adds simulation to see changes applied.  And let's increase it to 5.  And as you see now particles start moving much faster along the axis.  Again as well increase orbit speed, basically it's spin speed and suction speed.  The force which goes towards the center line of the force.  I will increase radius and increase suction speed so particles stay closer to the center.  As you see we have really fast motion in the beginning for particles.  Okay let's adjust the settings.  As well we can increase influence of force with a resistance parameter.  And let's decrease life expectancy to 1 and decrease the bit orbit speed.  And set lift speed to 3.3 adjust suction speed.  Let's increase fall off.  I'll set soft edge to 1 and I will create pop force to get interesting looking motion.  Let's increase amplitude.  Let's say 2, 3 and increase subtle size.  As well I will activate nodes what give us ability to activate over time particles.  Let's increase life expectancy around 2 and now we have additional 2-blend motion  beside axis force.

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\introduction-to-particles-in-houdini-21-full-beginner-course-2026\frame_008.jpg

### POP Curve Force [47:27]
**Transcript:** Time to speak about pop cure force.  I'll disable pop force and delete the rest nodes what we created.  Delete a sphere and activate create.  To create a cure for guineae we should press top and type cure.  I will switch primitive type to busy curve to have nice smooth shape.  And if you press select the node and press intern viewport you can start draw a curve.  Let's draw something like that and right click and finish adding points.  I will shift source object to the beginning of the curve.  I will enable ghost in display so I can position grid properly.  Alright let's go back to pop network.  I will set expression and conste activation $f less than 15.  So mission will happen before frame 15.  And create pop cure node.  Choose user context geometry.  And now as you see this line 4 start effect particles.  I will increase life expectancy of particles to 21.  Alright.  See that the particles traveling along the curve and spinning around it.  Maximum influence radius control the distance from the center of the curve where force will  be applied.  A resistance basically it's influence of force.  All scale parameter responsible for speed how fast particle traveling along the curve.  So see if I increase it they start traveling faster.  Always keep in mind that most of cure force parameters has a ramp.  So basically if you would like to have constant force along all curve and for all effect  radius of the force you should set properly ramp parameters.  Let's set here for example to 1 and now force should have same strength over all length.  But as you see the particles this time just go away from curve.  It's because we should increase suction scale.  So basically this parameter help us to keep particles closer to center line.  And again it has separate ramp control.  Let's decrease suction scale to 2.  And a resistance to 3 in the can set lower suction scale to 1 for example.  And increase orbit scale so particles can have more turns to spin.  Alright something around 11.  And this you see we have this red to black transition in ghosting radius of the curve  force.  It's because we have this force long length multiplier.  So basically how overall force applying over this fly length like global multiplier.  Let's say.  So again if you would like to have a constant force you should just set all flex value  to 1.  And let's be sure that all grid inside of curve I will pin this viewport and adjust the  grid position.  I will rotate it slightly in x axis.  And move it down in z.  Alright something like that so it's always inside.  Yeah and you see with time the particles just travel outside of force because global multiplier  is have smaller values there.  Let's increase both force amplitude to 10.  And maximum influence radius will increase also to 5.  I will increase constant burst rate to have more particles.  So basically you just need to find the proper settings for units when you play with that.

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\introduction-to-particles-in-houdini-21-full-beginner-course-2026\frame_009.jpg

### POP Attract, POP Interact [54:07]
**Transcript:** And now we can go and discuss pop attraction node.  First I will disable pop force and pop curve force.  Press top and create pop attract.  This node will help us to attract particles to position or surface points or another particles.  First type is position.  If you choose pop attract node and press enter in viewport you'll have axis.  We can drag the position in the space.  And now if you click play particles start going in the direction of settled position.  I will remove constant activation expression and set there one.  So we have constant flow of particles.  In the top force you can control different methods how you would like to attract your particles.  The fault one is x-larate.  It applies force in the direction of goal position.  Your scale is a magnitude of this force.  If I increase it the particles start moving faster.  Reverse all distance parameter describes the distance within particles will have a repulsive  force instead of attractive.  Pick force distance parameter show maximum distance within attraction force is scaling based  on distance to target and outside of this distance attraction force will be equal to force  scale.  And maximum distance is influence radius of the force outside of this radius force will  be not applied.  If I set it to 10 you will see that no force particle got no force now.  Let's increase it back.  Let's say 250 still nothing too far.  So back to 80.  And now particle start attracting again.  Let's increase big force distance.  So see how particle accelerate and blows it to position attraction.  Alright, next type is force method follow.  That case I'm going back to goal top and choose particles.  Potraction type.  In that case particles will be attracted to another particles.  So I'll create a second stream.  Let's go to solve level and create sphere.  Move the side and copy pop source node.  Set Constructuation to 1 and impulse activation on first frame.  Let's say it would be 5 particles.  The stream name would be stream source first input 1.  So we have different group of this particles.  And I think I forgot to choose proper input was source geometry.  Let's go to source type and choose your second context geometry.  Okay, this I will guide the surfaces.  Now I will copy pop force from the left stream to the right stream.  So lead particles will have some velocity.  Let's decrease amplitude to 5.  Now I go to pop attract node and now I should select particles.  I'll just go and copy the name of the group and put a stream on this core and paste the  group name.  Alright, now you see that particles start attracting.  But because we have much added average position and goes in the center of second particles  stream point cloud.  Let's increase force scale to 50.  And now I will choose point per particle method.  As you see nothing happened, but if we uncheck go ID it starts working.  So first particle stream start to find point and try to follow it.  I'll add some directionality to force.  10 degrees amplitude.  So lead particles go into direction of first stream particles.  Let's add something minus 1 in y and minus 3 in z.  And now we can choose predict intercept.  So follow particles will try to predict where it meets the leading particle position in  time and space.  So behavior will be different if we just have follow without prediction.  Next attraction type is points to show how it's working.  Let's go to soap level.  I'll delete sphere and create this geometry picket.  I'll check it shader, increase scale of it, move it to the site and add some animation  to it.  There's some random rotation and position to have more interest in motion.  Something like that.  And I'll go back to popnet.  I'll remove second stream because we don't need any more second stream particles.  I'll remove point group and choose use second context geometry.  And now if I will hit play, happen nothing.  I'll choose force method, accelerate and now it starts to work.  So body goes try to follow picket.  Let's create pull drag.  I'll wire it after pull attract to have some dampening.  Now shoot look cleaner.  That set irresistence to point one.  Yeah.  So I was working like a shoot.  That set expression and constructivation dollar f less than 15.  So particles emitted only before frame 15.  I'll rematch picket geometry to show you that particles attracting basically to two points  of picket.  And as you see they can stay some of them very close and to keep them apart you can use  pop interact node basically adding repulsive force.  Let's let's leave it as default setting is.  We can increase position force to keep particles apart even further so they will try to avoid  have same position.

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\introduction-to-particles-in-houdini-21-full-beginner-course-2026\frame_010.jpg

### POP Collision Detect, POP Properties [63:22]
**Transcript:** Time to speak about collisions.  I'll rub off all nodes here go up picket.  We don't need cure for anymore.  I'll keep great.  I'll regard to default settings for center parameter and rotate.  Move it up.  Great test zone 3 rubber toy.  Increase scale disabled shader.  We don't need it.  Move it closer to great.  Can't even increase scale more.  And now I will set expression into rotation X.  I'll use sign function.  And in brackets I will write dollar F. I need to multiply it for example by 40.  Maybe by 20 and multiply everything by 5 by 15.  Okay so we have some kind of tilt motion.  We will use the rubber toy as collision geometry.  If I shift click on rotate parameter you can see that this expression just give us a  sign curve infinite sign curve.  As well you can use motion effects if you would like there is a plenty of option you can  use noise or another thing but I will use a simple sign curve.  Okay let's go inside of pop network.  I will enable beg gravity and I will set constet activation to 1.  And life expectancy around 2.  And I will create pop collision detect node.  This node help us to detect collisions and apply certain operation on collision.  First we need to connect our collider.  I will choose second context geometry.  And as you see now every particles what collided with collision geometry become red.  So we can clearly see particles on heat.  As you see we can uncheck this option color heats in this case it will  don't have any color.  Now we can change the respond for example I will choose die it means every particle  when it's colliding will be killed.  Let's go up and create a merge node and I will pin the viewport so you can  always see upper level.  Alright let's decrease constant burst rate to 6000 and I will increase maximum  subsets to 5.  To make it work I need to do attribute create node and set p scale attribute.  Or even better I can show you another node called pop properties which allow us to set  uniform scale as well.  We can adjust it here and set for example point 1.  As you see this time we have no stepping.  Alright so now our particles killing on collision.  I am pin viewport and now we can set response to stop.  So as you see any particles what's colliding just immediately losing any velocity and  stop at the same position.  Another response is stick so it's not just stopping it's sticking to the collider surface  position and keep staying there.  The last option is slide.  So particles will slide on surface and drop later.  It's really nice if you want to do a rain simulation or something like that.  Let's create for example another geometry.  It will be box.  I will change dimension.  I will duplicate pop collision detect and use third context geometry and for that I will  choose stop and click move to hit.  It stays on the position in moment when the particles hit collider.  So as you see now we have fun particles which is sliding on rubber toy and another particles  just stop on collision when they collide in this box.  Let's increase life expectancy to 5 so particles will stay longer.  I'll create sphere and plug it as a force geometry.  I'll duplicate pop source and choose yours first context geometry.  I'll move sphere to side so you can see.  And because now all pop collision detect node plug into first stream it's not affecting  right stream particles.  I'll decrease constant burst rate to run simulation faster.  And if you want colliders affect boss streams all you need to do is just to move this  node and connect it parallel.  So in that case it will influence all particle streams just to remember.

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\introduction-to-particles-in-houdini-21-full-beginner-course-2026\frame_011.jpg

### Static Object (Bouncing Collisions) [71:23]
**Transcript:** What if you want to have a bouncy behavior so basically basic collisions like we expected  to have not sliding not sticking but just bouncing.  In that case let's remove these nodes and we need to use a static geometry.  Let's create merge node.  I'll connect it after gravity and create static object.  I will plug it into merge.  It's very important to remember that there is a relationship so left input affect right  input.  So basically everything on left side will affect anything on right side.  You should switch to be able to use static object correctly or change affect relationships  to mutual.  In that case the order doesn't matter.  So here we can fit our collision geometry.  Let's copy test rubber toy.  On the side and in sub pass I will set pass to collider geometry.  As you see our geometry have animation but in the simulation it not animated because  we need to click on use the deforming geometry checkbox and now we have animation.  We will start colliding but the bounce is really big.  We will fix it a bit later.  Here you can choose collision detection.  It can be a surface collision or volume collision.  I'll show you how to do volume collision in a minute.  Now let's keep surface collision and go back to bounce settings.  I will decrease bounce parameter to point one.  It shows how fast particle on collision lose energy.  So if you have bounce at one it means it will not lose energy over time at all.  And point one basically just keeps 10%.  As forward shows if the tangential motion of particle will be impacted by friction or  not.  If it equals one it means it will be affected only by friction.  Friction parameter shows the scale of friction for particle.  Dynamic friction scale shows the scale of friction for sliding object between 0 and 1.  Let's create the ground plane and connect it to merge node.  Now we have and ground collision and collision for rubber toy.  Ground plane have similar settings for physical parameters.  As well particles have their own.  So all of them should be considered.  Bounce is too big so that set bounce for ground plane point one as well.  In pop property you can control as well some physical parameters like bounce, bounce forward  and so on.  And if you need to apply to certain stream of particles you always can choose what group  you want to use or even if you have just some portion of particles selected into group  you can control separately for each group.  Because in pop object setting supply to all particles inside of same named pop object.  This decrease for example bounce to 0 and as you see now particles have no jump at all.  And if you set it to 10 they will fly into the air much higher.  It's basically exploding all around.  That's too much.  Okay now let's check how we can use volume collisions.  But default it uses maximum axis method.  And if you would like to see the collision guide you always can check it and uncheck display  geometry so you can see how volume geometry looks like.  Okay so if you would like to use a custom volume you should choose volume sample mode and  create sdf volume for your collider.  You can use collision source node it does everything.  It's as well calculating the velocity for your object.  If you click on display point trails so you see that as geometry doesn't have this attribute  but after collision source it's already calculated.  You can choose approximation settings as well and in volume top you'll have your volume  settings.  Let's use second output create a null called proxy and if we display the null you'll  see that we have sdf surface.  This name collision.  That set walks the size 0.05 and go back to popnet.  And now in proxy volume we should put past to proxy volume.  What we just created.  And change so past to collision source node.  Can display geometry and check collision guide.  And now we're using volume collisions instead of surface collision.  That set balls 2.1.

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\introduction-to-particles-in-houdini-21-full-beginner-course-2026\frame_012.jpg

### POP Replicate [78:35]
**Transcript:** Now can speak about pop replicate node.  This node, draped particles from particles.  Press stop and create pop replicate.  I'll connect it after pop property.  And as you see now every particle have a certain amount of particles rounded.  And what we should know that when we have a collisions inside of simulation we should  have and couple of attributes what go alongside with that.  And one of it is hitnam.  Basically it gives one on collision and zero when particle is not colliding.  So it can help us to determine where collision happened.  So let's choose option and meet from attribute and in attribute parameter type hitnam.  So particles will be replicated only during collision.  I'll decrease constant burst rate to 100.  And change life variance.  So if isn't closer you see that the particles start replicating when it's colliding with  colliders.  I'll decrease uniform scale.  And now we will see it not so good because the piece scale is affecting the radius of replication.  Let's use impulse activation and impulse count to three.  And add to inherit velocity I will set one and point five in y.  So now we can see it better.  Have slight extra velocities on top of inherited one.  Okay, I will slap.  I'll put point five into velocity in y and one one into variance in y axis.  So now we have kind of rain setup.  As well you can add a noise to the replicated shape.  So it will be not a perfect sphere.  As well can choose different shape when you're replicating particles.  It can be sphere or lines, linder and so on.

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\introduction-to-particles-in-houdini-21-full-beginner-course-2026\frame_013.jpg

### POP VOP, POP Wrangle [81:07]
**Transcript:** As well in pop network like in soaps we can control attributes of particles with VOP.  In this case it would be pop-up and pop-rangle.  Both of them using VACs.  Just pop-up will have a visual interface for that.  Let's check pop-up node.  I'll connect it with pop-up property.  And let's say we want to have more interesting motion when particles falling.  In this case I'll go inside of pop-up and add curl noise to particle velocity.  So I will adjust it slightly to have more interesting motion.  First what I gonna do I will break velocity into vector and scalar value.  To get direction I'll use normalized node and to get speed itself, scalar speed.  I'll use length.  After that I'll create the curl noise and plug position into position input.  Create add node and add noise to direction of velocity.  Normalize vector again and multiply by scalar speed.  And connect it to output velocity.  As you see now we have some noise in motion but noise have a very big impact.  So to decrease it impact I will use mix node.  And I'll mix between a touch vector of velocity direction and velocity with noise.  And now bias will control how much we affect in the initial velocity direction.  Let's set it to 0.25.  So just slide this slide layer to basic velocity direction.  Pop-up replicated will be stream underscore pop-up replicate one.  So we can apply pop-up only for the main source particles.  So when particles are replicating they will be not affected by this pop-up.  And then just fall affected only by gravity without any velocity direction modifications.  Increase life expectancy to 5.  And for pop-up replicate 2.  Yeah so as you see when particles replicating they not affected by pop-up node.  As well you can always click right mouse button on pop-up node and expect vex code.  What's node doing for you?  So basically here you can see that this is just a visual interface for vex.  Okay let's disable it and let's create something more fancy.  Let's say when the particles touching the ground they start spinning these vortex force.  To do that let's go back to soft level and create velocity volume.  Let's create VDB node, call it density.  Add one more volume, call it V for velocity.  Choose vector field and vector flow velocity for vector type.  After that I'll create VDB activate node like VDB and use s reference box volume.  So if you see now we have 2 VDBs, it's for density and for velocity.  And now we should modify velocity.  I will use volume velocity node and here we can add vortex force.  I'll create single velocity to 3 and to visualize it I will scatter points into volume  and use volume trail node, connect points and volume.  Choose V for velocity volume.  And as you see now we have this vortex velocity field.  We can control different parameters if you need in volume velocity node.  I will shift slightly the center of it.  Create node to expert and call it volume.  I'll copy, past node and create new pop-up.  Here we can use separate inputs data.  I'll use SOP for input 2 and put the past to velocity volume.  Let's create volume sample to read density and volume sample vector to read velocity  because it's a vector attribute.  Connect output 2 to file name and position into sample position.  And for signature I'll use not primitive number but primitive name.  I'll type density, sample file and for sample vector I'll choose primitive name and V.  Next let's create compare node so we can check if particles inside VDB volume.  By default values inside VDB volume is negative.  So if we set less than 0.1 it should work correctly.  And now time to create two ways switch.  In first input we'll plot velocity.  And second one velocity from volume.  So basically if particles inside of the threshold we will have velocity from volume.  And now if we hit play you see that particles when they start getting closer to box  they start speeding affected by volume velocity.  And let's shift a bit center increase force.  So you can see how it works now.  Right let's disable it.  And now I'll create pop wrangle.  Basically with help of this node you can use direct-vex expression to control attributes on particles.  Doing the same as pop-up but here you just should type call to yourself.  We will use again a hit now attribute to get when particles is colliding.  I'll use simple expression if hit now equal to 1 then we will add to velocity some custom vector.  In my case it would be 1 and x1 and y and 0.  Okay let's let's do 10 10 0.  And now when particles colliding they will go to side.  Let's set just 5 in wine 5 in z to see it better.  So now you see when particles colliding they just have additional velocity  what proves them to the left side.  As well we can use for example to change another, the pop wrangle to change another  attribute let's say color and we can set color to red if it's colliding.  But before that I'll set default color to 0 because we don't have color set yet.  And in this case when particle colliding it will have red color and when it's free of collision  it will be black.  One of the basic notes what I forgot to mention is pop kill so let's disable pop wrangle

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\introduction-to-particles-in-houdini-21-full-beginner-course-2026\frame_014.jpg

### POP Kill [90:58]
**Transcript:** and enable pop replicate move it up and create pop kill note.  Connect it after pop replicate.  So as you see first we can enable deleting particles by rule by default that equal to 1.  That means all point replicate particles will be deleted.  So let's type if attribute h bigger than 2.2 then particles will be deleted.  So have a very short lifespan.  Basically here you can use any vex expression to control rule for division.  If I grab it and apply before pop replicate it will affect main particle stream as well.  Okay let's disable rule and go to bounding tab.  Here we can kill particles by bounding box.  First need to click to enable checkbox.  And now all particles inside of bounding box will be killed.  If you wanted to kill outside you should just click on invert.  Let's connect it parallel way.  So the fact in all particles  so as you see everything inside get deleted.  As well you can choose bounding sphere about object about in volume.  There is also random tab where you can render we kill particles.

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\introduction-to-particles-in-houdini-21-full-beginner-course-2026\frame_015.jpg

### Orient, POP Spin, POP Speed Limit [93:02]
**Transcript:** Okay let's move forward and now time to talk about spin.  I'll delete all these notes.  And let's create pop.  Spin node.  This node create for us orient attribute even if we don't have it by default.  So if we click now on information you'll see that there is no attribute and when we connect pop  spin. And I'll play it simulation. Now we have it orient because orient it's a vector 4  quaternion is responsible for particle orientation. And in this case spinning.  Let's disable it and go to sub level.  I'll create dog import fields node.  I'll put dog network, popnet, choose the photo object and choose preset particles.  And now I'll create copy to points to instance geometry onto particles.  I'll create box, connect it to first input and to second input particle system.  I'll change size in that axis to 4.  And let's remove any collisions.  And I disable gravity as well.  As you see here is no velocity attribute.  So let's set initial velocities. I'll set it to 7 and y and 7 in z.  And rotate viewport.  So now they go to the side.  This case to the right side.  And as you see now,  particles starting to align these velocity attributes. It's because we don't have  normals or orient.  Orient is a high preo. So if you have orient attributed, all this will take consideration first.  And only after normals and after that velocity.  So let's create attribute create node and I'll set up normal.  Attribute. Let's display point normal in the viewport. It should be vector attribute.  So I'll choose size 3.  And as you see now particles stop aligning this velocity and aligning by normal attribute.  Because it's higher preo than velocity in this case.  But if after that I'll create new attribute randomized node.  And here this node as well can create attribute even if it's not existing.  So I'll type orient.  And I'll choose dimension 4 because it's criteria. So it's vector 4.  And I choose direction orientation distribution and call angle 180 degrees.  So if we check we have now orient.  And you can see it's nicely displayed in the viewport.  So we have random rotation.  And now particle system will consider orient as a primary orientation attribute.  Just what I said about hierarchy. Orient is the most proper way to control orientation  and spinning. So I suggest you always to rely on this Quaternion vector 4 orient attribute.  Now disable all nodes except of point velocity.  So we have just initial velocity go go inside of pop network and enable pop spin.  And if you click play you can see that spin start around y axis. Let's set axis to z.  And spin speed to 360. It measures by degrees in second.  Let's set some curl noise to initial speed.  And increase scale and decrease swirl size.  Disable display of orient attribute.  And now you can see that instance geometry start using orient attribute to spin.  To align particles piece velocity in orient attribute.  We can create attribute triangle and type attribute orient equal  to the headroll function which allow us to align one vector onto another.  And first vector would be 001. And second one normalized velocity to get the direction of it.  And now if we will display orient it should be aligned correctly with velocity direction.  Point trail usually shows you opposite direction of a particle movement because it's trail.  Okay, let's create attribute create and  in name type p scale.  To adjust the size of instance geometry.  Let's say it would be point three.  Okay, let's disable attribute triangle.  And enable back random orient attribute.  And we can go inside of pop network and choose axis relative to particle orientation to have local spinning.  You always can change the spin axis. I'll set a x.  Let's add pop wind.  To have some turbulence in the motion.  I'll set amplitude to three and a resistant.  Very small. Let's say 0.09.  I'll pin sub level viewport to see the instance.  And now in the vex expression we can control speed based on velocity.  So I will use length of velocity vector to get scalar speed.  And then I will set spin speed parameter.  Equal feed speed if speed between 0 and 10.  It will have.  Spin 10 degrees and 360.  So basically faster particle moving faster it's spinning.  That's how you can use vex expression to control any parameter in  pop nodes.  Let's go up and disable attribute randomize.  And instead enable attribute triangle with give us ability to set orientation based on velocity  direction.  And as you see now it's rotating correctly.  It's going and rotating in direction of motion.  And when speed become slow the spin slow down as well.  And disable wind.  As well very handful node called both speed limit.  So basically you can limit minimum maximum speed and minimum maximum spin.  So if you set it to any value the speed of the particle will be not higher than this value.  Or you can set a minimum speed if it's not equal to 0.  It means particle always have slight motion.  For example let's say three it means at least particle speed will be equal to three.  Same you can do is maximum spin to limit spin speed.  Let's remove both wind and both speed limit.  And enable by gravity.  So I'll disable point velocity and attribute triangle to align or into its velocity.  So now particle just falling down and how we can control  these external attribute direction of spinning to do that we can again use a pop-up node.  Before that I'll reduce life expectancy to two  and press stop and create pop-up.  Go on site and create node called random.  Basically it gives you random value between 0 and 1 and I will plug ID as input.  So for every particle the different value between 0 and 1.  Signature I'll set 3D output.  So we have a vector and I create destination minimum minus 1 minus 1 minus 1 and positive 1  as a second destination maximum parameter.  Let's call it round random spin axis.  So it would be just random axis to rotate around.  And now here we can just hold cursor on axis to see the proper name for this parameter to call  it in the axis expression. It's called just axis.  Axis equal random spin axis.  And as you see now this attribute have a random value per point,  their particle and it's using to spin particle around this axis.  Let's set both drag.  Just decrease a resistance.  And crease life expectancy.  Now let's slow down the spin  and decrease scale of particle.  Even smaller let's say point one.  And pin the viewboard go back to prognet.  And now I'll show you how you can align particle some collision.  Let's scale up collision geometry and move it down.  And I will rotate it in my axis as well.  So now I will need to create pop collision detect to invert collision geometry.  Use second context geometry.  Okay, so collision is happening now.  Let's go up, create a merge and display together  instance geometry and particles and collision geometry.  Now you can go to behavior tab and in response to stick.  So now particles will stick to object.  But as you see they keep spinning  because the spin is constant.  So to do that basically we just need to pick up the attribute from  collision geometry to stabilize or rent attribute for particles.  You can do it several ways.  I think the most efficient would be just to use specifying function.  For example, but to do it the simple way I will do it just with simple attribute transfer.  Let's increase life expectancy of particles to six.  And now what we need to do is create proper  or rent attribute for geometry what we will read after  and transfer it to particles.  To do that I will use node called orientaloncurve.  I'll connect geometry.  And as you see by default it creates normal and up attribute.  I don't need it.  So I uncheck them and I will check what turnion orient.  Now we have orient attribute we can display it in viewport.  And I will go up and in tangent type I will choose previous edge  to have a nice distribution.  Let's disable display of orient attribute.  And since it would be post process so we don't need to connect this node directly into simulation.  I'll create attribute transfer.  And choose orient attribute for points and set distance threshold.  So the distance where we can already start copying attribute.  Let's set up to zero and blend width set up to 0.15.  Okay, let's set distance threshold 2.1.  And now as you see the particle starting here,  attribute from surface and they just sticking and get rid of any spin on the geometry.  Another node what operating with orient attribute is poplookat.

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\introduction-to-particles-in-houdini-21-full-beginner-course-2026\frame_016.jpg

### POP Look [110:40]
**Transcript:** Let's delete these nodes.  Just clean up a space a bit.  Thanks in their move box.  I still need it.  All right, let's keep on with that thing.  I'll move to zero emitter surface.  And go inside of popnet.  Delete unnecessary nodes.  And disable gravity.  Okay, let's disable constant activation and set impulse activation to 100.  Okay, 500 and set activation frame equal to 1.  So it would be created only in first frame.  And create poplookat node.  Connected.  And as you see, we need a reference object.  So let's go to object level, not sub level, but object level and create a null.  Let's move it up.  And to the side in x axis.  And I'll click to set a keyframe.  Go to frame 64 and change, change position.  And set another keyframe.  Set go in diagonal way.  Let's go inside and choose a null  object.  I'll disable use up vector.  And increase p scale attribute to have bigger size for the instance particles.  And now as you see particle, start following the null animation.  So basically it's always looking at target.  That's how you can use this node.

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\introduction-to-particles-in-houdini-21-full-beginner-course-2026\frame_017.jpg

### POP Location, SOP Particle Trail [113:12]
**Transcript:** Another option to create particle system is to use poplookation node.  Let's remove pop source, press stop and create poplookation.  Here you can choose a position where emission should happen.  I will move it up.  Use impulse activation.  I will emit only on first frame.  Let's say 500 particles.  Use live expectancy 1.5 and variation 1.  I will add velocity in y axis.  And z axis.  So we have kind of burst of particles.  Increase variance in z axis as well.  And variance in x axis and z axis.  I'll quickly create pop pop.  And add same technique what we used before.  I will normalize velocity to get direction.  And use length to get speed of particle.  Then create curl noise, like position.  And add curl noise to direction.  Normalize vector after.  And mix it.  With original direction.  And the result multiply by speed.  Plug it to velocity output.  Let's add some small bias.  So adding slightly.  baseline turn,  decrease frequency to get bigger spiral size.  Increase amplitude to 3,  Okay, something like that.  And as you see, the stream will be named publication.  Now I can go up and I will show you another cool node in Goudini, which called  Particle Trail.  It creates slides based on particle velocity.  Let's go to shape.  We can choose frame duration.  So for how much frames it looks to create trail as well, you can use method for shutter speed.  Same logic as when you're entering particle space motion blur.  If you need more sub steps, we can increase the sub steps parameter.  We can control weeds.  To seed, we should create polywire.  To create geometry around line, and use attribute weeds to control wire radius.  And now we can check overall scale parameter.  So we can adjust tail width, we can adjust head width.  We can use scale alone length.  So it will be relative.  And use ramp to set whatever shape we want.  We can scale as well over normalized age.  So basically it will be scaled during life of particle.  It can start bigger and then slightly disappear.  So we have options scaled by noise.  And you have basic noise parameter like element size and amplitude.  So you can set minimum weeds.  So basically it will clamp value.  If you don't want to have zero weeds value.  In look, you can control alpha.  So it's a positive of particle.  It changes alpha to good.  Again, you can control scale alone length.  And control it with ramp.  And scale over normalized age.  So it will be a pack in the beginning and transparent in the end.  If you're using default ramp setting, you can adjust it with ramp as well.  You have intensity.  So you can use later in render.  So you can adjust color.  You can set constant color or use ramps, a load length and over normalized age.  It's great to use for spark.  So effect like that.  When you don't want to use velocity motion blur in render time.

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\introduction-to-particles-in-houdini-21-full-beginner-course-2026\frame_018.jpg

### POP Advect By Volumes [119:38]
**Transcript:** Time to speak about volume at the action.  Let's move great to the origin.  I'll change size.  Seven and seven.  Gone side pop net, delete pop pop.  Delete ground, blame.  Delete pop location and create pop source.  Keep scatter on surface.  Use first convex geometry.  And in burst up.  I'll set impulse activation to one.  Impulse count to 1000.  In impulse activation set expression, emit particle on first frame.  I'll disable gravity.  And delete particle trail node.  Dym inside pop net.  And create pop at the by volume.  Start connected.  And as you see, we need to set pass to velocity volume.  I'll create VDB, name well, vector field and type velocity.  I'll create bound for the grid and increase lower and upper padding for y axis.  Then I create VDB activate node like VDB to first input.  And to second input bound and choose reference to fill bound with VDB volume after that  I'll create volume velocity.  And add vertex.  Create node and call it well for velocity.  Copy it and paste it into salt pass.  So now as you see, particle starting to be affected by volume velocity.  And when it's rigid limit, just keep slightly moving.  I'll create pop at drag node.  So they try to reach the center and increase big force to 1.  Give it 2, 3.  Big force to 3 and 4 scale to 10.  Okay, something lower, let's say 4.  2.  For now, let's quickly create pyres simulation.  I'll create sphere and pyresource to fill sphere with particles.  Because we needed attributes for rest rising later with VDB.  I'll choose mode volume scatter and initialize smoke.  So we have density and temperature attributes.  After that I create pyresolver.  Of course it's not working because we should just rise it.  Let's create volume rasterize attributes.  Inside of here, choose density and temperature.  And for coverage attribute, I'll choose p scale.  And click on normalize by clamp coverage to have smoother feather for volume.  Right, now let's go up to fast.  So let's go to shape and decrease buoyancy to 0.5.  And add some turbulence to the simulation.  Set up to 21.  Okay, maybe we should decrease temperature value.  Let's say 0.1 instead of 1.  And as you see now we have velocity, three volumes.  We can go to output top and I need just density and velocity.  And I can plug sphere as a meter geometry to particle simulation.  And connect velocity null to pyresolver.  So we will read from pyresimulation velocities.  There is different advection types.  Basically it's force.  But you as well can update velocity.  It would be more accurate.  You can blend velocity with any other pop forces.  And as you see the problem here, like if you don't have them,  the particles may just stop.  When they reach the limit of velocity volume.  So in that case you can add some additional small pop force.  To increase altitude,  you're smaller.  Just to have something,  and volume velocity equal to 0.  And set velocity blend between 0.5.  And if we increase all force, you can see it better.  They move in on the edge.  Updated position is the best advection if you want to move particles precisely with volume velocity.  Advection method allows you to use different from single step method.  And you see for condition to set how many voxels should be considered due to calculations.  The number higher than one may cause some issues,  but it will be traced much faster.  The lower value will increase simulation time, but will be more accurate.

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\introduction-to-particles-in-houdini-21-full-beginner-course-2026\frame_019.jpg

### Instancing in LOPs (Collections) and Karma Motion Blur [128:11]
**Transcript:** Now I can speak about instance in NKarma and Motionler.  Let's plug grade back as a meter.  And let me display and fix those issues with vertex force.  Because yeah, they are going.  And they are going to also.  Let's go up.  And I'll show you.  What happened?  That's so great.  I can use points to display and second input for velocity.  And let's move the center of vertex to the center of a meter.  And if we check now from side, you'll see that we have this bulge.  So let's click on constant velocity and set it to minus one.  So we have flat vertex.  Now it's working.  Good.  But we have these stuck no velocity particles.  Let's create a pop kill.  Enable the rule.  Let's create flow speed.  Local variable equal length velocity.  So it will be a speed of particle.  If it's equal to zero, then we will remove it.  Okay, that's interesting.  I think.  Okay, let's if it less than point two.  Set like that.  Okay.  So now we have only moving particles.  And let's decrease amount of particles to 200.  And go up to the dope input field.  Create a log network.  Go inside create soap import node to import particles inside of salaries.  Create no like the import field call it particles.  Copy node and paste it into subpass.  Change sub layer to copy sub layer.  Create new camera.  Adjust it and create merge node.  Click on log sign.  So I accidentally do not touch and move camera.  Later it's needed only four position camera.  Create a karma nodes.  And I will create some don't light as well and merge it.  All right, let's see we have velocities here.  Let's increase the scale of the election force to seven.  And it's always good to recalculate velocity after I'll create the point velocity node.  And check much by attribute to use ID and choose approximation central difference.  Go back to salaries.  And I will use CPU to render.  Here is exposure of dome light.  Go to camera effects.  And as you see to enable velocity blur, I should go to motion blur.  And choose velocity blur and drop down menu.  Now I put display flag on the camera in the settings and as you see,  motion blur starts working for particles.  You can increase sub steps if you need it.  I'll render it to employee.  That's the crease exposure or flight.  And crease primary samples to boost quality.  As well, we have option to compute acceleration.  It's usually better for this kind of rotational motion.  And you should choose velocity blur to acceleration.  Let's render it here.  And play NFEC.  It's getting better curved motion blur.  Passage motion of particles.  Don't have this straight.  Steppy shape.  So keep it in mind.  I'll disable for now motion blur.  And let's check how we can instance geometry in karma.  Boost count to have less particles.  First thing, it's always we can do copy to points on salt level.  For example, I create the box.  And sphere.  And picket.  Test geometry picket.  Without shader.  I will merge objects together.  And create a sample node.  So every geometry will have its own name attribute.  Create bug primitives from them.  Increase p-scale attribute.  And now I should assign separate,  should assign randomly or in cycle name attribute to points.  So they know which geometry should be copied.  I'll use attribute from pieces node, like we discussed before.  I split viewboard and choose geometry spreadsheet.  So you can check if we have proper name attribute on points.  Yeah, I have it now.  So I'll go to copy to points and choose piece attribute name.  So as you see now, we have every point, every particle,  have its own object assigned.  How we can do it inside of karma.  I need to plug null after attribute from pieces.  So we have a name attribute.  And let's go to InstanceNode.  Insularies.  Create object merge.  And paste past two particles.  No.  Create sub-import.  And copy past two assemble.  Paste it in sub-pass.  Sublayer style copy sublayer.  Plug it into second input.  And as you see now, we have the issue that all instances doing same thing.  So basically it's just copying all objects onto the same point.  So to figure that, we should create a collection node.  I will switch layout to solaris.  I have import past prefix here.  I will call it library.  And as you see, we have this prototypes, piece 0, piece 1, piece 2.  So let's connect collection after sub-import.  And here I will type slash library.  Slash prototypes.  Slash star.  So basically I'm writing the pass to the geometries.  And collection name geo.  Now we can go back to InstanceNode.  And here prototype primitives choose collection geo.  So as you see now, it just randomly, because prototype index random.  And drop down menu selected.  So just randomly assign the geometry to point.  But what if you want to use exactly the same how we see in it in sub-level.  In that case, you should just switch from drop down menu to name attribute.  In this case, I will pin viewport for solaris.  And unpin it here.  So as you see, it's totally same distribution, because it's referenced by name attribute now.  And if you change any offset in the attribute from pieces.  Note it will automatically apply in solaris as well.  So you can preview like that on sub-level.  Okay, and now we can set display flag to karma render settings.  And let's render it to the CPU.  And as you see, the motion blur is not there, which is because we disable it.  I'm unable it.  Okay, it's because we should set up instance velocity blur.  As well, it's here. So choose from drop down menu velocity blur or acceleration blur.  And if you have acceleration attribute or velocity attribute, it will blur it.  That's how instance and motion blur working in solaris.  So we can go to next step.

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\introduction-to-particles-in-houdini-21-full-beginner-course-2026\frame_020.jpg

### Final Project, render in Karma [140:51]
**Transcript:** Let's do better election setup.  More accurate.  I started new scene and create geometry object.  Let's go inside.  Create box.  Change size in y-axis.  And create transform node.  To move it up.  And I slightly tilt it.  Okay, now let's do R-B-D solver and simulate falling of this object to the ground.  I'll choose ground type ground plane.  And create R-B-D configure to adjust rotational stiffness.  Click on rotational stiffness and increase it to 2.  Okay, so now we have a box falling to the ground.  And now we can create a meter full volume.  I'll do box again.  Try to match hate with current falling box hate.  Next create, pyresource node to create points from volume.  This case in the mode I choose volume scatter.  Decrease particle separation.  And add attribute density.  Now I will restoreize volume by attributes.  And I copy separation parameter to voxel size.  Choose an attribute density and p-scale for coverage attribute.  I will check normalized by clamp coverage.  Create pyresolver.  Connect the first input source volume.  In sourcing I delete temperature field, burn field, velocity field.  I will create the first frame.  I need sourcing on the first frame.  I'll create delete node.  Choose delete by expression and type $f equal to 1.  We have emission only on first frame.  As you see, because of dissipation volume start disappearing.  Let's go to field step and disable dissipation.  Now I will create unpack node.  In our debug server we have packed objects.  After that, I will create point velocity.  To calculate velocity of the following object, choose central difference.  And now I will create VDB from polygons to create collision volume.  I will set voxel size to 0.02 and name it collision.  I check field interior.  Add an attribute point velocity.  Choose velocity from vector type.  Connect it to the second input of pyresolver.  I will go to collisions and change collision type to sdf plus volume velocity.  Now I can add ground plane.  I choose close below y.  And as you see, collision start to work.  Let's copy particle separation and set based relative reference to voxel size of simulation.  As well, for collisions, I will increase velocity scale 1.5 to increase impact of the following object.  To smoke.  In fields, I will add a speed field so we can use it to control turbulence.  I will go to shape tab.  I will change the turbulence.  Threshold field will be density and control field will be speed.  I will compute range to see the values what we have.  In this situation, I will set point 1 and 1.  For the range.  Okay.  So now, when collision happened, turbulence started to be activated.  Increase maximum octaves.  And we can even increase a bit resolution of simulation by decreasing voxel size.  Okay.  Something like that.  I will move a meter a bit left and extended slightly.  Now it's better.  Maybe even a bit more.  Now, go to output tab, disable temperature flame and CD fields.  Convert volume to VDB and use 16-bit float.  Let's create volume warp after.  And VDB analysis note will help us to operate on velocity field to calculate lengths.  So basically, basically calculate speed of velocity.  I'll choose output name custom and call it speed.  I'll plug it into second input of volume warp.  Use volume sample to sample fields from the second input by name, call it speed.  And multiply density by speed to have only areas where speed equal not to zero.  As well, we can feed range if you want to clip even more.  Let's say the minimum would be 0.2, 0.3.  So we get rid of zero velocity volume.  Now create point from volume and change point separation to have more points.  I'll increase the diter scale as well.  Let's create grid and note called match size.  So grid would be same size as source box, check scale to fit.  And now I will scatter points on it.  Let's say 600,000.  I will use them as a meter four points, but we'll activate them by points from volume.  Let's do attribute create note set value to one and call it activate.  Now I'll use attribute transfer to transfer this attribute to static points.  Choose activate attribute and decrease distance threshold to 0.2 and bloodweets will set as well.  Now we can display attribute and see how it will affect.  And let's create note attribute from volume.  I'll separate velocity volume.  Create note call it velocity.  And let's transfer velocity to the attribute.  So particles will have velocity now.  We can transfer velocity as well to static points.  To be clear we can't put name well to be sure it's transferring correctly.  I'll create attribute warp.  And let's create bind note and import activate attribute.  After that we can create compare note.  So basically we can easily only activate particles.  I'll create if block, black compare to condition.  Let's call test less than and compare if it less than 0.14.  We will remove point.  Connect handle and ptnum to ptnum.  So now if points is not activated they will be removed.  As well we can add additional condition.  Delete particles based on velocity as well.  Let's plug velocity to length note and compare the speed particle.  So we can connect it to second input of or note.  And increase threshold.  So only high speed particles will be used to emit.  And let's use frame to stop emission after certain frame.  I will use test greater than and let's say frame 45.  Ptnum will be removed after frame 45.  In the global seat of scatter note I will set dollar of expression.  So every frame will be different seat for particles.  So they now to spawn in same position.  And before scatter let's apply the texture to points.  So scatter particles will have UV attribute.  And then we can use attribute from map to use some texture map to inherit color for particle.  And now we can create pop network.  Go on site.  For now let's decrease overall amount of scattered points to 100,000.  And emission type I will choose all points disabled guide.  Life expectancy I'll set to 4 and variation to 1.  And I will remove any overlapping particles.  Let's play simulation.  Okay I think I don't need to inherit velocity.  And particles will be drive in just by volume.  I'll copy pass to velocity null.  I'll paste it into sub parameter.  And change election type to update velocity for now.  Let's check how to work.  And then decrease velocity to 0.95.  And slightly decrease velocity scale to 0.75.  And then change node and ground plane.  I'll move ground plane upper because we have left inputs affect right.  Let's play simulation.  Now let's import properly into sub level.  Create dog input build.  Track and drop dog network.  Choose object and particle preset.  Before popup act I will set all property and set up p scale to 0.001.  And let's recalculate velocity.  I'll choose match by attribute ID.  And for example I'll decrease to 0.5.  And choose approximation central difference.  Now create null call it particles.  To export them into salaries.  Create a log network.  Copy particles new.  To import particles in the salaries you saw input.  Put the pass into sub pass parameter and choose copy sub player.  Now I'll increase back to 600,000 emission particles.  And let's wait for simulation.  Alright let's go back to salaries.  And create new camera.  Let's position it.  And unlock it.  Now create material library.  We're going to assign geometry and put star because we have just particles on top.  Create carma material builder.  Go on site.  And now we should use a color attribute.  So I'll create geometry property value to import it.  And color attribute CD.  Kind of working to display color.  So we should type this name.  I'll connect it to color and to emission color.  As well I'll create dome light.  In fact now we use an emission color.  But in case if you want to decrease emission amount.  We will need some light in scene as well.  I'll create carma setup.  Choose XPU as an engine.  Increase pass tray samples.  And in camera effects I'll choose velocity blur for motion blur.  Increase exposure for light.  And choose a HDR map for dome light.  Now the test render.  Loc camera and adjusted position.  I forgot to set emission intensity.  And I'll set it one for now.  Create a constant parameter.  And plug it to opacity.  Choose vector.  And let's say set opacity to 0.3 in each axis.  Slightly increase pass tray samples.  And now I can set a frame range to render.  Let's say it would be from 10 to 80.  And I will render to emplay.  And this is result of the render.  If you would like you can decrease emission amount and see better influence of dome light on the particles.  As well you can use different attributes to control color or any attributes.  What you want.  And let me show how you can do that.  What if you want to use a speed of particles to control color.  In that case let's go to the pop net.  I'll go to some frame where we already see particles.  And create pop color node.  I'll choose type ramp.  And in vex expression.  I'll type fit length for velocity.  So basically this is a speed between 0.2 and 1.  Set value minimum 0 and maximum 1.  So I'll just remap it.  Let's set for input maximum 2.  I'll choose ramp preset.  I have more interesting color distribution.  And as you see now the high speed.  Particles will have yellowish color.  And slower particles blueish.  I can adjust the input maximum value.  Let's say 2.1.5.  And select again.  As well you can do it not in simulation.  You can do the support process in attribute wall or attribute triangle.  When you are the cache simulation but since it's going pretty fast here.  I'll just do it inside of pop net.  Okay and now I'll just go to lock net.  And do create render of it to am play.  Let's go to shader.  And I will increase opacity for particles.  Let's say 0.6 in every component.  And I'll increase velocity to 1.  Okay and now I'll hit render to am play.  This is the end result.  So as you see the fast moving particles have yellowish color.  And it go gradually to bluish when they slowing down.  That's how you can use any attribute to control the color, mission color or any other shader attributes.  I hope this course was helpful for you.  And if you like it, hit like and subscribe to my channel.  Cheers.

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\introduction-to-particles-in-houdini-21-full-beginner-course-2026\frame_021.jpg


---

## Structured Notes

### Core Technique
Full beginner POP pipeline covering every core particle node (source, solver, color, group, forces, collisions, orient/spin, replicate, VOP/wrangle, kill, advect-by-volumes) plus instancing in both SOPs and LOPs/Karma with motion blur. Final project: RBD box hits ground → drives pyro smoke → activates and colors scatter-based particle emission in Karma with velocity-colored rendering.

### Summary
165-minute comprehensive course by Pixel In The Frame for Houdini 21. Covers 22 sections end-to-end from POP network setup through final Karma render. Notable for: detailed collision setup (surface vs volume SDF), orient/quaternion hierarchy (orient > N > v), POP Look-at node, Particle Trail SOP, volume advection with velocity VDB, and a full instancing-in-LOPs workflow using Collection node. Final project integrates RBD, pyro, and particles into a cinematic dust render.

### Key Steps

**1. POP Source**
- Create geometry → go inside → Tab → "pop network" (auto-creates basic nodes)
- Emission types: scatter-onto-surface / all-points / all-geometry / item-type-points
- Geometry source: first input (default) or "use parameter" + paste node path
- Source group: target specific polygon group for emission
- Emission attribute: use a point attribute (e.g. turbulent noise → bind export) to weight probability
- Remove overlapping: set to "existing" to kill duplicate particles at same position
- Burst tab: activation expression (e.g. `$F==10`), constant burst rate (particles/sec), impulse (per-frame count)
- Impulse activation expression `$F<10` = emit only before frame 10
- Just born group: named group containing particles only on their birth frame; use with Split to isolate
- Live expectancy (seconds) + live variance; set `$F==1` activation for single-frame emit
- Inherit velocity: "use inherit velocity" reads v from source geo; set with Point Velocity SOP upstream
- Add to inherited velocity: inherited + extra vector
- Set initial velocity: explicit vector
- ID attribute: keeps unique per-particle number even as ptnum reorders — always leave enabled
- Stream tab: group name defaults to `$OS` (node name); duplicate sources → split by stream group

**2. POP Solver**
- Sub-steps: global in DOP network level; adaptive via min/max substeps + CFL condition in POP Solver
- CFL requires `pscale` attribute on particles; create with Attribute Create node (name=pscale, value=0.01–1)
- POP Properties node: sets uniform scale (pscale) conveniently
- Timescale parameter: global simulation speed multiplier (animatable for slo-mo/fast-mo)
- Stopped attribute: value=1 deactivates particle; POP Awaken / POP Wrangle can set to 0 to reactivate

**3. POP Color**
- Types: constant (uniform), random (by ID + seed), ramp (normalized age `@age/@life`), blend (two colors + ramp), alpha (opacity by ramp)
- Ramp type uses `fit(@age, 0, @life, 0, 1)` in VEX to normalize age 0–1

**4. POP Group**
- Group by rule, by bounding object (sphere/box/volume), or random (add/remove from group)
- Combine tab: union/intersect/subtract groups
- Workflow: group → black color to just-born group via Source's just-born param; assign color inside group only on birth frame so color persists after leaving bounding area

**5. Instancing Geometry (SOP level)**
- POP Instance node: creates `instancepath` string attribute pointing to geometry path
- In DOP: DOP Import Fields → choose pop object + particles preset → then Instance SOP reads `instancepath`
- Attribute Randomize on `pscale` → vary sizes; must use "set attribute by ID" to prevent size flicker as particles die
- Copy To Points: box/sphere/etc. on input 1, particles on input 2; enables Pack and Instance checkbox for memory
- Multi-geometry library: merge geometries → Name SOP (auto-creates name attr per closed mesh) → Attribute From Pieces assigns name per point (random/cycle/etc.) → Copy To Points with "piece attribute name" enabled

**6. POP Force, Wind, Drag, Wind Shadow**
- POP Force: directional force + turbulent noise (roughness, attenuation, turbulence levels, subtle scale per axis)
- POP Wind: same but has `resistance` parameter — resistance=1 alone acts as drag even with zero wind velocity; wind velocity drives directionality; resistance controls influence scale
- POP Drag: wind with zero wind velocity; air resistance = drag scale
- Multiple wind nodes: opposing equal resistances cancel; unequal → net direction
- POP Wind Shadow: place after POP Wind; connect moving object to 3rd input + Point Velocity SOP for object velocity; creates wake effect (particles inherit collider velocity); requires POP Wind node above it

**7. POP Awaken**
- Awaken or put-to-sleep particles when entering a volume
- Workflow: Attribute Create `stopped=1` (all deactivated) → POP Group with bounding VDB → POP Awaken reads group, activates within volume
- Choose "activate group" in Awaken to prevent first-frame artifact of particles falling before volume grows

**8. POP Axis Force**
- Types: sphere (orbit around center), torus
- Parameters: orbit speed (spin rate), lift speed (vertical), suction speed (pull toward center axis), radius, falloff (soft edge)
- Air resistance: scales force influence

**9. POP Curve Force**
- Draw curve SOP (bezier) → connect to context geometry input
- POP Curve Force: maximum influence radius, resistance (force strength), all scale (travel speed along curve), suction scale (keep particles near centerline), orbit scale (spin around curve)
- All parameters have per-length ramps — set ramp to 1 for uniform force; default ramp tapers off at ends
- `force long length multiplier` = global multiplier along curve length

**10. POP Attract, POP Interact**
- Types: position (attract to point in space — drag in viewport), particles (attract to another stream), points (attract to geometry points)
- Force methods: accelerate (force toward goal), follow (pursue goal), predict intercept (lead the target)
- Parameters: force scale, reverse at distance (repulsive zone), pick force distance (attraction scaling zone), maximum distance (influence radius)
- Point-per-particle follow: uncheck "go ID" to enable
- POP Interact: repulsive force between particles; position force = keep-apart strength

**11. POP Collision Detect + POP Properties**
- POP Collision Detect: connect collider to context geometry; response options: color hits, die, stop, stick, slide
- POP Properties: uniform pscale, bounce, bounce forward, friction parameters; can target specific group
- Static Object: use for bouncy collisions (non-DOP-detect); must set affect relationships correctly (mutual or left-affects-right)
- "Use deforming geometry" checkbox required for animated colliders
- Surface collision vs volume collision: volume needs VDB SDF (Collision Source node computes it + velocity); set proxy volume path
- Volume collision setup: Collision Source → second output → null "proxy" → paste path into Static Object proxy volume field; change collision detection to "volume sample"
- Bounce: energy retained on bounce (0.1 = 10%); friction / dynamic friction scale also apply

**12. POP Replicate**
- Spawns new particles from existing particles
- Emission attribute: `hitnow` (1 during collision, 0 otherwise) → emit only on collision
- Inherit velocity + add to inherit: splatter direction control
- Shape options: sphere, lines, cylinder, etc.; noise option to randomize shape

**13. POP VOP + POP Wrangle**
- POP VOP: visual VOP inside particle sim; can use separate inputs (SOP input for reading external volumes)
- Curl noise on velocity: normalize velocity → get direction + length → curl noise → add to direction → normalize → multiply by speed → mix with original (bias controls influence)
- `if(ingroup(0,0,@ptnum,"stream_name"))` to apply VOP/wrangle only to specific stream
- Volume advection in POP VOP: Volume Sample (density) + Volume Sample Vector (velocity) → compare density < 0 (inside VDB) → Two-Way Switch
- POP Wrangle: VEX directly; `if(@hitnow==1) { @v += {5,5,0}; }` to add velocity on collision; `v@Cd = {1,0,0};` to set color on collision

**14. POP Kill**
- Kill by rule (VEX): `@age > 2.2` etc.
- Kill by bounding box or sphere; invert checkbox
- Random tab: probabilistic kill
- Position in network matters: before POP Replicate affects main stream too

**15. Orient, POP Spin, POP Speed Limit**
- Orientation hierarchy: `orient` (quaternion vector4) > `N` (normal) > `v` (velocity)
- `orient` is highest priority — always use it for reliable spinning
- POP Spin: creates orient attribute; axis, spin speed (degrees/sec)
- VEX expression for spin speed: `@spinspeed = fit(length(@v), 0, 10, 10, 360);` — faster particle = faster spin
- Axis relative to particle orientation: local spinning mode
- `maketransform(normalize(@v), {0,1,0})` → or use `dihedral({0,0,1}, normalize(@v))` to align orient to velocity direction (`@orient = dihedral({0,0,1}, normalize(@v))`)
- Attribute Transfer from Orient-on-Curve SOP: transfer orient to particles that stick to surface → stops spin on contact
- POP Speed Limit: clamp min/max velocity speed; clamp min/max spin speed; minimum speed = always-moving floor

**16. POP Look At**
- Creates orient pointing at target object (null); use up vector or disable it
- Requires reference object path; animatable target

**17. POP Location**
- Emission from explicit position (drag in viewport) instead of geometry
- Impulse activation + count for burst; supports variance in all velocity axes

**18. SOP Particle Trail**
- Creates geometry trails (lines) from particle velocity/history
- Frame duration: how many frames to look back
- Polywire: turns lines into geometry; use `width` attribute for radius control
- Scale along length + ramp: taper/shape the trail
- Scale over normalized age: fade trail over particle lifetime
- Alpha ramp: fade opacity along trail length
- Color: constant, ramp along length, ramp over age

**19. POP Advect By Volumes**
- Connect velocity VDB to node's volume input
- Advection type: force (add velocity as force) vs update velocity (set velocity directly — more accurate) vs updated position
- Blend velocity: mix between advected and other forces (0.5 = half-half)
- CFL condition for number of voxels considered per substep
- Pyro integration: pyresolver outputs velocity volume → feed into POP Advect By Volumes

**20. Instancing in LOPs + Karma Motion Blur**
- SOP instancing: Copy To Points → Name SOP → Attribute From Pieces → Copy To Points with piece attribute
- LOPs instancing: SOP Import particles → Collection node (path = `/library/prototypes/*`) → Instancer → prototype primitives = collection name
- Switch instancer prototype source from "random" to "name attribute" to match SOP distribution exactly
- Karma velocity motion blur: in Karma Render Settings → Camera Effects → Motion Blur → "velocity blur"
- For instanced geometry: set instance velocity blur in instancer settings (velocity blur or acceleration blur)
- Acceleration blur: better for rotational/curved motion; requires `accel` attribute; use "velocity blur to acceleration"
- Point Velocity SOP upstream (match by ID, central difference approximation) to recalculate v before export

**21. Final Project Setup (RBD → Pyro → Particles)**
- RBD box falls → Pyro Source (volume scatter, density attribute) → Volume Rasterize Attributes → Pyro Solver
- Collision Source SOP: computes SDF + velocity for moving collider; feeds pyro solver collision input
- Speed field in pyro: Turbulence threshold = density, control field = speed (use Compute Range first)
- VDB Analysis → output name "speed" → Volume Sample "speed" → multiply density × speed → threshold with Fit Range (clip near-zero velocities)
- Points From Volume → scatter points as static mesh → Attribute Create `activate=1` → Attribute Transfer to static points (distance threshold 0.1–0.2)
- Attribute From Volume: transfer pyro velocity to static points
- Attribute Delete non-activated points using If Block + Compare; also filter by speed threshold
- POP Advect By Volumes with pyro velocity; Pop Kill for zero-velocity stragglers
- Pop Color with ramp: `fit(length(@v), 0.2, 1.5, 0, 1)` → velocity-to-color ramp (yellow=fast, blue=slow)
- Karma shader: Karma Material Builder → Geometry Property Value "displayColor" (Cd) → connect to color + emission color
- Render opacity via constant parameter connected to opacity input

### Houdini Nodes / VEX / Settings
- **POP Network** — DOP container for particle sim
- **POP Source** — emission node; scatter/all-points/all-geometry/item-type modes; burst/constant/impulse
- **POP Solver** — timestep, CFL, substeps, timescale, sleep settings
- **POP Properties** — uniform pscale, physical params (bounce/friction)
- **POP Color** — constant/random/ramp/blend/alpha types
- **POP Group** — bounding sphere/box/volume grouping + random + combine operations
- **POP Force** — directional force + noise turbulence
- **POP Wind** — directional wind + resistance (drag); resistance acts as drag even at zero wind velocity
- **POP Drag** — pure drag node
- **POP Wind Shadow** — wake effect behind moving collider
- **POP Awaken** — activate/deactivate via volume; `stopped` attribute
- **POP Axis Force** — orbit/lift/suction around axis
- **POP Curve Force** — travel + orbit along curve; suction scale keeps particles near curve
- **POP Attract** — attract to position/particles/points; follow/predict-intercept modes
- **POP Interact** — repulsive inter-particle force
- **POP Collision Detect** — detect hits; die/stop/stick/slide responses; `hitnow` attribute
- **Static Object** — DOP collider for bouncy physics; surface vs volume collision
- **Collision Source** — computes SDF + velocity for moving collider
- **POP Replicate** — spawn child particles; emit from `hitnow`
- **POP VOP** — visual VOP in sim; multi-input for external geometry
- **POP Wrangle** — inline VEX (`@hitnow`, `@v`, `v@Cd` etc.)
- **POP Kill** — kill by rule/bounds/random; position before/after replicate matters
- **POP Spin** — creates orient quaternion; spin speed in degrees/sec; local-axis mode
- **POP Speed Limit** — clamp velocity and spin speed ranges
- **POP Look At** — orient particle toward target object
- **POP Location** — emit from explicit position (no source geometry)
- **SOP Particle Trail** — trail geometry from particle history; polywire for thickness
- **POP Advect By Volumes** — advect particles by velocity VDB; force/update-velocity/updated-position modes
- **Instancer (LOP)** — instance geometry in Solaris; Collection node for prototype library
- **Collection (LOP)** — wraps SOP geometry prototypes for instancer
- **Karma Render Settings** — velocity blur in motion blur tab; acceleration blur for rotational motion
- `dihedral({0,0,1}, normalize(@v))` — align orient quaternion to velocity direction
- `fit(length(@v), minSpeed, maxSpeed, 0, 360)` — map speed to spin rate
- `if(@hitnow==1) { @v += ...; }` — collision-triggered velocity impulse in POP Wrangle

### Difficulty
Beginner–Intermediate

### Houdini Version
H21 / any modern (H19+)

### Tags
[particles, pop, pop-solver, pop-force, pop-vop, pop-wrangle, collisions, instancing, karma, solaris, lops, motion-blur, beginner-intermediate]

---

## Related Tutorials
- intro-to-houdini-particles---full-beginner-course.md (Voxyde VFX version — complementary POP intro)
- intro-to-houdini-solaris---full-beginner-course.md (deeper Solaris/Karma/instancer coverage)
- intro-to-houdini-pyro---full-beginner-course.md (pyro sim used in final project)
- intro-to-vops---houdini-beginner-tutorial.md (VOP math used in POP VOP/wrangle)

