---
title: MOPs: Motion Operators for Houdini Part 2
source: YouTube
url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=J2g0v1k6MBs
author: Houdini.School
ingested: 2026-06-23
houdini_version: "[PENDING]"
tags: []
extraction_status: pending
frames_dir: tutorials/frames/mops-motion-operators-for-houdini-part-2/
frame_count: 50
---

# MOPs: Motion Operators for Houdini Part 2

**Source:** [YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=J2g0v1k6MBs)
**Author:** Houdini.School
**Duration:** 170m22s | 50 section(s)

---

## Raw Data (for Claude Code extraction)


### Curve Setup [0:00]
**Transcript:** All right, well, I'm just going to share my screen here and hope that nothing crashes.  Looks like that's working, I think.  Okay, well, Mops 102.  This is going to be a lot of content.  Hopefully it won't go over as long as last time, but there's a lot to go over.  So I'm just going to jump right in.  The first thing that we're going to go over is some of the more advanced modifiers.  So we had done a lot of the core Mops nodes before, things like transform and noise and things like that.  And now we're going to do some of the trickier stuff.  So the one that I want to open up with is one that solves a pretty common motion design problem in indeed, and that's moving along a curve moving objects along any kind of curve.  And then know that we have for that is called the Mops move along spline modifier.  So I'm just going to start with the usual pig head and then I'll run it through Mops convert to just quickly make it into a packed primitive or you could use the pack stop.  Like I was trying to explain before there's a million different ways you can do these things and you're not required these Mops to do them.  It'll work with any packed primitive with an ID attribute, but convert automatically does this for us. So it's just an easy one to have around.  And I am going to make just some arbitrary curve for this thing to run along. So just.  This is whatever it really doesn't matter.  So now that I have a curve, what I'm going to do is drop down the Mops move along spline modifier.  You can see that there's three different ones. These two, the distribute and snap group are just presets.  So basically if you know that you quickly want to make a move along spline setup where you want all of the copies that you're instant sing to be evenly distributed along all curves.  You can use that as a preset snap group will basically take a whole cloud of objects and just treat them as a single object when moving along the spline.  It's totally up to you how you want to do it.  But for now, let's just start with the basic one and this doesn't apply any presets at all.  So the curve is going to go in the second input and the convert is going to go to the first one, the things that you actually want to move along the spline.  The other thing that I need to do for this is I don't want this to be a busy a I can set it to nerves.  And now it should work, but it doesn't really know how to interpolate.  Bezier is very well. So polygon curves also totally fine. If you want, you can run a resample.  And that's a good way of getting taking a polygon curve and making sure that it's going to be properly smooth and everything.  Just don't use bezies and I know that that's the default for the new curve sub so in 19 so I feel like I got to mention it.  So the way that this modifier works is it's sort of two there's two stages. There's an attached stage and there's an animate stage and the attached stage is basically saying.  From this point, how do I want to determine what my start point for each of these things is because we're working in procedural space here.  So like every single frame is self contained. You don't automatically necessarily know like what you're starting conditions are because this isn't necessarily a simulation.  It can run as one, but in this case, it's procedural.  So when you look at the attached tab here, you've got a curve select mode where you can select a, you know, which curve do I want to attach to.  We only have one here. So it really doesn't matter. We're just assigning to primitive number zero.  The attached method is more important here when we've only got one curve.  And what this is is basically saying, where do you want your starting point along this curve for each primitive to be.  Right now we have it set to nearest point. And so.  If I were to go here and move this peg around just translate it in different directions, you can see that it's basically finding the nearest point on the spline and just snapping it to that position.  You can also use attributes to do this. So I'm just going to copy this setup and paste it here.  And now I'm going to go over here and instead of the attached method nearest point, let's pick an attribute.  And I don't currently have one it's looking for some attribute called goal you.  And so if I just want to sort of test this one easy way to do this is just with mobs playing follow off you could also use a point wrangle this one just already has a slider built in for you.  It's going to call this goal you as a follow up attribute.  And now I can set this to be you know, decided along and you can see that what it's doing is sort of just using that attribute to pick where it wants to be along the curve and that's just it's looking for parametric coordinates.  So zero to one along the entire length of the spline.  So that's the other way that you can per primitive you could decide where you want these things to be anchored.

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\mops-motion-operators-for-houdini-part-2\frame_000.jpg

### Curve Offsets [4:37]
**Transcript:** And I'm just going to copy the setup again real quick.  Just going to keep going through the different ways that you can sort of approach this.  Okay.  Second.  So this time, instead of just copying this indirectly, let's make a bunch of them so we can see how it works with multiple instances.  So I'm just going to pop this in here, maybe turn the global transform down a little bit.  And I've just got the default grade of about 25 pickheads.  What I'm going to do now is pipe them into the, I'm just going to delete this, is pipe this into the move along spline modifier.  So I'm going to do a default what they're all going to do is just because I have this set to attribute, let's just set this to nearest point is they're all going to find the nearest point and then just stick to it.  And that's sort of, you know, that this is the expected behavior from the beginning is they're just going to find a nearest point on the curve and then snap to it.  But we have other options we can say instead distribute and now we're going to get them evenly distributed along the entire length of the curve as the starting conditions for it.  So let's actually play around with, because I want to kind of explain why this is done in in two stages and sort of what that actually means if I drop down and hops randomize after the fact.  And let's,  let's randomize position and orientation both.  I'm just going to set like a minimum translate of maybe one unit and a maximum of one units that they're offset from that curve and let's template this so you can see where the curve is actually supposed to be.  And that's also randomize orientation.  Now I'm going to drop down another months move along spline and this is not necessarily how you would always use it you don't usually need to, but in this case I'm trying to sort of establish offsets and then show you sort of what this snap means.  That'll make more sense in a second. So now I'm running another move along spline and you can see that they immediately snap back onto the curve and they're oriented in the direction of the curve.  The reason for this is that by default under the offset tab here maintain offset and maintain orient offset are both set to zero.  So I'm going to crank this up to one what it's doing is essentially saying I want you to snap to the nearest point on the curve, but I want you to maintain your current distance.  And that might sound a little confusing so there's a thing here called visualize offset, which is basically going to just draw these little yellow markers that sort of show you where on the curve it's attached to.  And you're sort of attaching these things to the curve.  What it's going to do is act as if the point on the curve is an anchor as if it's got a stick attached to it. And so when these things move along the curve they're going to move as if they're pivoting from that point on the curve.  So as the curve twists and rotates, they'll follow as if they're stuck to it literally by like a stick it's like it's almost like a constraint or a parent child relationship.  And maintain orient offset is essentially the same, but what it's going to do is you know because those things were randomized up front if you want to keep that input orientation.  You have this sort of slider to decide how much of that offset you want to maintain.  You also have ramps that you can use to control this sort of over the length of the curve. So if I want these things to be offset more on one side than the other from trying to make like a funnel.  I can do that this way and now they maintain their offset at the beginning of the curve, but as they approach the end they get sucked in.  And you have similar controls for the orient offset ramp.  Just one second please.  Okay, so now let's make up a quick setup that's going to use multiple curves. I'm going to make like a funnel shape here. So I'm going to make a line and I'm going to move it slightly off center.  And then let's resample it.  This should be plenty by default.  And then I'm going to use one of my favorite nodes guide process bend.  To bend this curve to just make it like a, I'm going to make one part of a funnel shape and then we'll copy this around.  So I'm going to bend this.  The mode when it's by default is bend in red direction. I'm going to set this to access constant and it just means that I get to tell this thing what access I want it to bend over and by default it's negative Z.

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\mops-motion-operators-for-houdini-part-2\frame_001.jpg

### Curves Combine [9:16]
**Transcript:** And then let's just crank the angle to 75. And so now I have this bent curve that's sort of facing outwards.  What I'm going to do now is just copy copy and transform.  And not copy to points and then let's make.  Let's say eight or so.  And then we'll do it at 45 degree angles. So we have this sort of evenly distributed funnel of of curves.  So if you look at the point order here, it's going up as on the way out and I want them, I want the objects to be going down.  So I'm just going to quickly put down a reverse stop.  And the reverse basically just it's going to change which point is zero in which point is one parametrically on each of these on each of these curves.  So now things when I, when I animate them, they're going to want to go from zero to one. So now they'll funnel downwards.  And so now let's just do the same start with some pig heads and we'll use the mobs instanceer.  And maybe for starters, I could instance them directly to the move the result of those splines.  Actually, you know what, I don't even need to do that. It doesn't matter because I'm just going to have them distributed anyways.  So, spline.  And let's just we can go to the distribute tab to activate the preset. This is a good way to show off kind of what that does.  So you can see that now it's saying use nearest and distribute, but what I'm actually going to do is distribute on curve select mode as well.  So now I'm going to get just an even distribute distribution of these peg heads on each of the splines.  And let's go to the global transform on the instanceer here and turn scale down. So it's a little bit more reasonable.  And so now what I've got is these things evenly distributed along each of these curves, you know, as evenly as possible.  You can see that they're a bit twisted because what it's doing is sort of it's trying to draw turn off the template flag on the sky here. So it's not getting the way it's trying to compute the orientation on each one of these curves.  So that the orientation of the curve is going to define how these things are actually facing.  You can see that reorient curve is enabled by default.  If I don't like the orientation here, I can just go in and go to the orient curve tab and then just apply a twist.  And if I delete the twist ramp and just I can apply the twist globally.  So if I do it's going to be like roughly negative 90 degrees.  And then I can just do a little facing directly down the funnel.  The other thing that you could do if you don't like the orientation as it is is you could just add a transform modifier after the fact.  this. If I don't like where they're facing, like maybe I want them to go backwards for whatever  reason, I can just do a rotation here to make up for it. Just one second. So another interesting  thing that we can do with this and just delete this and go back here. If I go to the Animates tab,  this is where you actually control motion for this thing. So there's a number of different controls  here. There's a lot of different ways that you can drive this animation, but at the simplest method,  all you're doing is just adding to the current goal position. So if I drag the slider along,  you can see that what they're doing is just moving from A to B and then wrapping around to the start.  And this is because the wrapping behavior here is on by default. If I turn this off and then move  the goal, you'll see that they'll reach the end of the spline and then just stick there.  The goal type goal U basically just means that you're defining a goal for each one of these things  and just sliding it across. And if it reaches the end, if wraps enabled, it'll just go back to the  beginning of the curve. But there's a number of different ways that you could potentially interact  with this. The arc length mode, I'll show you in a bit, but it means that you can go by length instead  of parametric zero to one when you're trying to figure out where each of these things goes. We also have  the ability to randomize things slightly. So if you want to just like sort of shift the initial goals  around a bit, you can do that and then they'll still move at the same pace when you move the goal.

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\mops-motion-operators-for-houdini-part-2\frame_002.jpg

### Curve Detailing [13:36]
**Transcript:** Another interesting thing that you can do with this that I want to show real quick is,  and let me enable the spreadsheet here. I have a workspace that has a spreadsheet on by default  is right now for each of these things as we move them, we don't necessarily know where they are  in along the curve. But if you keep goal attributes, what this is going to do is you're given these extra  attributes that say that are sort of going to the output, what is the current goal for each one of  these things? So parametrically, where is it on each of these splines? And you have the curve number,  which is just which primitive am I attached to? So you can see that curve num is just saying like  which curve number am I attached to for today's things? And the goal is that parametric U for each one  of these things. So let's say that I want these things to all animate down the splines so real quick,  I'm going to go to the animate tab and let's say, just use a quick expression time times a point two.  So now if I scrub, they're just going to be moving constantly. I can take these attributes and I can  use them to drive other things. So maybe a transform modifier. All right, I can use that goal attribute  as a fall off. And then maybe I want to scale things down. So now as these pig heads, and let me just  scale them up initially so that I don't lose them. But now as they go towards the end of the curve,  they're going to shrink down. So having those attributes available to you means that you have like a  few more ways that you can influence the sim because otherwise you would have to sort of manually figure  out, okay, well, what is the goal for each of these things? Where do I put it? So you have a lot of  options here to be able to kind of take the animation that you've built and use that to drive other  effects down the chain. There's a couple of other things here that I can bring up. I don't want to go  into too much detail on them, but you have things like obviously the twist thing I already showed you  that can be driven by this ramp. So this is like on the zero end, the beginning of the curve,  this is the end. You can define the twists that they sort of spin as they go down this thing.  And obviously if you if you're just trying to set like an even twist around the whole thing,  you can just adjust the ramp to do it. You have acceleration options, which is basically just saying  maybe you want them to move faster at one end of the chain and the other. Right now by default,  the acceleration ramp is linear, which just means it's always going to be moving at the same pace  as your unit of one. But if you wanted to bias this so that they move, you know, you have like an ease  out towards the bottom, you can use this acceleration curve to make you want like an ease at both ends.  And now you can see that they start slow or even step that a little too low. There we go.  And now they'll accelerate towards the middle and then ease in these out. So you have a lot of  different options for how you want the motion to work. Also, if you're a vex guy, you have  expressions. And if you turn this on, these are sort of hints as far as all of the different things  that you can modify. So if you want to be very specific about the goal for each one of these,  you can set it here. And that also includes things like how much random movement do you want  the offset amount, so like the orient offset or the linear offset for each piece, all that stuff is  controllable here in vexpressions. And you can use any vex function to output to these variables.  Does anybody have any questions about this before I go to the next demo?  Okay, I just want to do one more really quick one here, just to show you what I mean by the arc length

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\mops-motion-operators-for-houdini-part-2\frame_003.jpg

### Speed [17:07]
**Transcript:** thing, because there's going to be situations where you might have multiple primitives of very  different lengths. And you don't want, but you just want everything to move at the same speed.  So let me explain how that works. I'm just going to make a line here. We're going to have it move  along the z axis, turn off templating so we're not going to confuse. So I've got this little line here.  And I'm going to just use the copy and transform stop. And translate these guys, let's say,  by one unit, but we're going to scale up, we're going to double in z with each copy.  And I'll make five of these. So I have five splines of very different lengths.  And now I'm going to drop down the usual pickhead. Let's put down, I like match size, because it makes  it'll center the pivot and make the thing unit scale every single time. It's a really handy node to use  before going into the instance. And then I'm going to make exactly five pickheads once for each of  these, for each of these curves that I've drawn. Let's just template this while I have it on.  And one easy way to do that is I've changed my distribution mode to linear. I can just say I want five points.  And so now I have five pickheads. And now let's go over to move along spline.  And as far as my attachment mode, I'm going to, I want one of these things to be assigned to each  primitive. And if I go to my attached settings, one of the attached methods I can use is attribute.  Now right now it's, it's basing this on, I'm sorry, this is not the right one. This is still fine. What I want is  the curve select mode to be using a primitive number, but I want a specific primitive number. I can  just use the ID attribute and it's already ready for me to go, right? Because the ID of these is  0 through 4 and I've got exactly five prims that are numbered 0 through 4. So now I'm going to get  one of these on each one. And then for the attached method, I can change this to let's say attribute.  And this can be goal you that's fine. It really doesn't matter because I don't have that. So this way,  everything starts at 0 because the goal you attribute doesn't exist and that's fine.  And then the, the next thing that I want to do is go over to the animate tab.  And instead of the goal type being goal you, I'm going to switch this to arc length.  And so what this means is that when I move across the goal rather than being parametric,  it's going to use the arc length of the curve. So the goal that I'm picking here is actually units.  So this first guy is exactly, the arc length is exactly one unit long. But for these others,  it's double that for each one. So now I can actually move the goal beyond one and you can see that as I  move this, the other guys are going to wrap around. But they're all moving at exactly the same speed.  So if you have a lot of splines of very different lengths, but you want things to still move evenly,  you can use arc length mode to control that and then just, you know, put an expression on goal the same as  you always would. And it's just not going to wrap for each primitive until it reaches the end of that length.  Speed this up a bit so you can see it a little clearer, but you can see that they're all moving at the same  pace you don't know the wrapping at different times.  Okay, does anyone have any questions about this operator that they want to ask before we go to the next  section? Okay, I'm just going to quickly move on to another similar operator. This one's not

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\mops-motion-operators-for-houdini-part-2\frame_004.jpg

### Orient Mesh [20:59]
**Transcript:** used as often because it's a little bit more complicated out of necessity, but there's another one  that works with meshes called move along a mesh. And it works under similar principles in terms of  like you first define an attachment point and then you define motion, but because meshes are  much more complicated, the sort of rules for how you orient things and how you decide how they move  are a little bit different. So what I'm going to do is just make an usual pig head here and this is  what I'm going to move around, but first I'm going to make a template mesh that I want these things to  move across. So I'm just going to use the let's say the template head. This is a good easy one.  Focus on it here. And then to make this easier, I want to sort of simplify this model a little bit  and it's got this bag on the inside and I want things crawling around inside this guy's mouth.  So I'm just going to blast the mouth bag group.  Just built in just to get rid of that. So now I don't have things crawling around inside there and messing up.  And the next thing I'm going to do is and you might remember this from the previous  tutorial, but I'm going to use orient mesh. What this is for in terms of how move along mesh works is  instances and this gets a little bit tricky and it's easier to visualize it.  Let me turn on normal display. That's going to be a little bit crowded. But normals are facing  directly outwards. And so when you're instanting things on this, when you think of the normal  direction of the mesh, what you want that to align to is generally speaking the up vector because  you want your objects to be pointing sort of outwards from the mesh and then moving forward  along their normal access or like their positives he access, right? So the way that this thing  works when you're orienting the meshes to be used for an optimal move along mesh is you want to use  the up vector of the template mesh as your forward direction. And that's why you have visualize  up vector on this operator so that you can kind of see like this is this is roughly what direction  that instances are going to go if you use move along mesh. This might be easier if I just scale  this guy up a bit so I can see this a little bit more clearly. And so obviously these vectors are  a little bit weird. And if you remember from before when you're automatically computing an  up vector on meshes, Houdini is going to guess what you might want the up vector to be by figuring out  the difference between the normal and positive Z and then applying that same transformation to  positive Y to figure out your final up vector. It usually doesn't work the way that you want it to.  So what I'm going to do is turn off auto up and now I have an up vector that is uniform across  this entire thing. But you have this option here called cross up vector and I'll explain a little  bit more about this in the math section. But you can see that now I'm getting now the up vector is  sort of flat and attached to the mesh and kind of wraps around it a little bit. The cross product  is something that I'll again I'll go over this in the next lesson, but it's transforming that  up vector against the normals in a way that's going to make fit it sort of stay stuck to the mesh  and wrap around it. And there's a few other options here that I could add if I wanted to in order to  make the movement a little bit more interesting. For example, I can add some curl noise so that we get  more interesting motion and you can see these things all kind of bending. Maybe I want a little  bit less noise so it's not overwhelming. You turn up the frequency so I get a bit more wiggles but  maybe not that much. Turn the ampletoe down and that's similar with blended with original but you  can you have a lot of different options here for like how you would want to mix something like that in.  But again, the goal what I'm doing is trying to get these vectors to sort of point in the direction  that I want things to move. And then finally I'm just going to call this template because what I'm

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\mops-motion-operators-for-houdini-part-2\frame_005.jpg

### Scatter on Mesh [25:13]
**Transcript:** going to do is instance these objects directly at these points. So I'll start down a mobs instance there.  And I'm going to set the distribution mode to mesh and then just drag the template in as the template  object. And let's scatter. We probably don't need this many let's start with 50. So we're not  completely overwhelming ourselves. So down here in the scatter settings I'm just going to set the  count to 50. And then I'm probably going to need to make these guys much smaller. So go up to the  instance settings, go to global transform and then just drag this way down. So now I can see this  a little bit more clearly. And I'm going to template this so I can see what's going on here.  So I've instanced these guys directly onto this mesh and you can see that they're oriented a little  strangely out of necessity because of how to mobs move along mesh works. But let's add that next.  So just like move along spline your instances are going to go into the first input and the thing that you want to move along goes onto the second.  And just like before we have an attached setting up front and this is sort of our first stage is determining how do we want these things to attach to the mesh.  Because we already instance directly to it in this case we don't really need to do anything complicated. We can just say near surface, but we could also scatter.  And that will sort of run another scatter operation to just randomly decide where you how you want these things to be distributed on the mesh.  Or we can use attributes in which case you have to provide a primitive on each one that you want to attach to and parametric UV coordinates on the mesh.  If you're not working used to working this way, these are the same attributes that you would get from a scatter stop.  If you choose to create them, it's also how the vex functions XYZDist and premium you work together. So it can get kind of technical to talk about. But basically every single face here.  Every primitive face has a number and that's your source prim. And then each one of those faces, if you were to sort of look at it as a flat grid has its own parametric UV where the bottom corner is zero zero and the top left the opposite corner is one one.  This can be tricky to generate by yourself. So normally you would use another function to get that for you. For example, I'll just show you how to put on the scatter stop.  If I were to scatter points on this head and enable output attributes source prim and source prim UV.  You can see that for each one of these points that I've scattered, I'm getting the primitive number that it scattered on. And then UV coordinates the Z attribute is meaningless because we're talking about faces in two dimensional parametric space.  But these are basically the UV coordinates so where am I attached to each one of these.  And these attributes are good to know about because attribute interpolate works with these the scatter stop works with these anytime you want things to sort of stick in position, the things that the instance or does for you automatically.  This is what it's doing under the hood to make that happen.

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\mops-motion-operators-for-houdini-part-2\frame_006.jpg

### Animate on Mesh [28:23]
**Transcript:** You can see that it has similar maintain offset maintain orient offset sliders here. So if I turn orient offset off what it's going to do is align all of these things directly to the effect of the temple to do in this case.  And you also have the linear offset which you're going to turn this off on attributes because what it's doing now is because I have the set to attributes.  Things have a source prim and source prim UV of zero. If I turn off maintain offset you can see that these guys are all just going to the zero zero parametric coordinate on primitive zero, which is now what we want.  We want this to just go to the nearest surface. And now you can see that these things don't really mean anything.  And the thing that I'm going to do is go to the animate tab. So by necessity, this node can't really work as a procedure operation.  Moving the long mesh is it's complicated and every time step, every frame of the simulation, the objects need to be re projected back onto the mesh or near the mesh based on the the offset value you're working with.  It has to be a simulation by default. All it's going to do is just stick to this thing. If you enable simulation. Now this is where you can actually get things moving around and I accidentally started at the end of my timeline. So let's rewinds.  And this is where you sort of have to start worrying about directionality and where these things are moving the forward vector by default is going to be the up vector and that's intended to work with mobs orient mesh.  And you have this up vector pointing in this direction kind of sweeping across the mesh here.  And so that's the the vector attribute or the vector or the relative vector direction that you want to move along for each of these things relative to that mesh.  If you're using an orient mesh, you don't have to think about this to are you generally just want these things to move along this direction.  You also have speed and random speed controls. Instead of animating an attribute, procedurally like you would by the with the default method of move along spline.  You're you have to define this as sort of the distance that you want each of these to move per time step.  You can see if I just play forward that these guys are following those yellow vectors that we had on the original mesh.  And then kind of sliding and orienting themselves to the mesh as they move.  You have random speed as well. So if you want some things to move randomly more than others, you can go back and you can see that now we have some that are moving a lot quicker.  You also have expressions for this. So if you have this enabled you can define speed or the axis per primitive.  And follow up also can be used. If you have fall off enabled, then this is going to change the speed by default is going to change the transform essentially the speed for each of these things per primitive.  The other thing to look at is blending orient. Because these things are in a simulation what they're do you you don't want them to necessarily snap to the orientation of the template mesh on every on every single frame.  You want most of the time you want smooth motion. If I set blend in orient to one, this means that on every time step these things are going to exactly snap to the orientation of the mesh relative to their own local orientation.  So if I move the timeline now you're going to see that as these guys move along they're going to, you know, especially on this guy up here towards the top.  You're going to see that he very quickly or like these guys on the on the year might be a better example.  You're going to see that they're very quickly going to snap orientations as they move along this thing.  Turning this down.  Means that only 10% of that new orientation is going to be mixed in on every single time step.  So that means that as they moves he's you know they're still going to rotate, but they're going to jitter a lot less.  Which is why this is the default for this is pretty low, but you can have this set even per primitive that equates to turn rate.  In vexpressions so you can get as weird with this as you want to.  The relaxant settings are these can be weird, but basically.  The way that things move along because polygon meshes are imperfect there's going to be situations where these things might gang up on each other and start colliding and so the relax settings are basically way for you to.  In force the separation between these points during the simulation.  You need to be really careful with these settings because if they're set too high like they are now.  They can sort of interfere with each other so usually your point radius scale needs to be pretty small.  And now they're going to try to separate from each other and prevent themselves from bunching up in one space, which on a lot of meshes if you're not careful with your up vector will happen.  And you know, you're polygon meshes you have you're going to have points of inflection you're going to have concave surfaces where things are going to dip in words a bit.  And so the best way to solve this in my opinion is not to use relax but to be careful about grooming your up vectors so that they're pointing in ways that are not going to cause this problem, but sometimes that's admittedly hard to it hard to do.  And the thing that you can do in order to prevent sort of jittery behavior on this is on orient mesh.  If I go back to visualizing this so I can see my my vectors here, you can also blur the up vectors to sort of soften the difference between these things, especially if you if you have a mesh that has a lot of tight folds and corners like the nostrils.  And then you use the blur options here to basically soften out the differences between these orientations, then I'll help make the motion a little bit gentler.  Does anybody have any questions about this node specifically before I move on.  you

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\mops-motion-operators-for-houdini-part-2\frame_007.jpg

### Q&A: Control & Direction [34:55]
**Transcript:** Yeah, anything that you want to do to tweak the up vector if you want to just copy it straight from something else that's totally possible.  You know, you you could set the up vector to be completely uniform is what you want the the only catch is that like, for example, if I turn off all of these options and I just have a uniform up vector for this whole thing.  And the catch is that anywhere where you're going to have.  In fluid simulation terms, it would be.  Divergence where you have velocities that are moving apart or together, you're going to end up with clumping, so you can see that here where all of these guys are just going to get stuck moving straight upwards and this guy even is getting stuck.  He doesn't he isn't able to get past this.  This point here because of the top of the ear is like a.  A point of inflection like he doesn't know where to go because he sort of stuck getting re projected on the surface individually.  So that's where things can get a little bit weird if you're if your vectors are not designed in such a way that.  They're going to sort of cleanly wrap around the surface.  Admittedly, this is a note that is that is not as easy to use as it should be and it's part of it is just because.  Parameterizing a polygon mesh like this is not easy to do on nerve surfaces.  This is automatic and if you remember the old creeps up in Houdini, which I think is still around.  The creeps up is meant to take a nerve surface like a sheet or a patch or something like that and with that it's very easy because you can take any nerve surface and parameterize it you can lay it out in zero to one very easily.  With polygon mesh is every single primitive has its own parametric coordinates and so there's a lot of.  Guess work involved in trying to figure out where to project to next.

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\mops-motion-operators-for-houdini-part-2\frame_008.jpg

### Q&A: Import Attribute [37:12]
**Transcript:** What you could probably do and you'd have to be careful about it. I mean one option is to just blast out the faces that you don't want it to go to but another thing that you could do is actually use the cum stop.  So if I grab this and actually set my if I override normal and set this to come up instead.  I can actually go in here if I enter the tool state I can brush the up vector to just sort of paint.  Where I want these things to go on this part just.  This tool can be a little bit hard to see when I'm doing this but you can see I'm kind of just like.  Parting this area a bit using the brush and this way instances are going to try to avoid that area when I pipe it into here.  The downside of the cum stop is that it's not really procedural it's a destructive edit so you have to be careful about that.

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\mops-motion-operators-for-houdini-part-2\frame_009.jpg

### Basics [38:07]
**Transcript:** Okay, the next thing I want to go to really quickly is how some of the expressions in these modifiers work because this is something that most mobs operators modifiers especially support but it's good to know kind of how to work with it.  So I'm going to make a new container here and we'll call this expressions.  And let's just make the usual box we'll give it vertex normals and then drop it into an instance or.  And let's do.  Set this to be fixed number and I'm going to make this a 10 by 10 grid and just increase the distance a bit.  And then frame this and so now I have this like nice little packed grid here and I'm going to drop down a transform modifier.  Let's you know I can set translate to three whatever and now all of these things go up at exactly the same rate, but you can dial this in however you want for most notes you know you're not required to only use the follow system to modulate how these things might work.  If you're more technical user you can use little vet snippets to influence this.  So for example, if I hit use vexpression and most nodes will have a checkbox here somewhere with a hidden vexpression box that contains sort of hints about what things you can modify what the different channel variable names are that you can change.  So if I want each of these things to translate differently.  By default, translate is whatever the channel value is so it's going to be a vector 030 and it's written here as an example translate equals 0 0 0 if I were to just copy this without the comment flag and paste it at the bottom here.  Now everything is translated to zero if I set this to one.  It's going to be evenly distributed across the board so these things essentially mean the same thing is just an override on these settings.  But I can set this in a lot of different ways for example if I want this translate vector to be you know a trigonometric function right a sine wave.  I could do something like translate why i'm going to multiply it because it is still reading this channel value so I currently it's 030 I'm just going to multiply the y component so the second component three against a sine function so let's say.  I'll do the time times two to speed it up a bit and then I want it if I just do it like this you can see that it's just going to bounce up and down.  But I could make this a unique sine function for every one of these things by adding some random amount to the to the value i'm computing maybe the idea attribute.  And now I get the same overall motion so it's going to be translating overall by amount of plus or minus three because a sine wave is going to return a value by default between negative one and one.  But now it's going to just have each of these things sort of move randomly between negative three and three offset over time.  So this is a relatively simple expression you can get a lot more complicated than this if you want to you can write as much vex as you want but the point is that.  These hints are essentially pointing at things that are defined in this interface and you can write snippets to modify or override any of them any way you like.  So the simple local here is is the same as this local space check box and so you can have some move in world space and some of local space.

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\mops-motion-operators-for-houdini-part-2\frame_010.jpg

### Basics Example [41:58]
**Transcript:** Most of these things can be modified that way.  Let me just do another quick example here i'm going to take like a box again and in fact let's just do the same exact thing it's going to copy paste these first two nodes.  And now let's.  Let's say keyframe a couple of things I know you do you guys hate doing that, but sometimes keyframes are nice to have i'm going to drop down the transform modifier.  And what I want to do is.  Make like a little pulse motion i'm going to have these things sort of move down like they're attached to a spring and then pop back up.  So i'm just going to key translate why at the beginning here and then let's say for.  16 18 frames or so i'm going to have it move down about one unit.  And then for the next frames up until one second so frame 24 i'm just going to.  And then we're going to have a set of frames up to zero.  Now all these guys are moving exactly the same way it goes down slowly and then pops back up.  Now I can do is put down a mop spring modifier.  To apply spring forces to this, which I believe I demoed last time.  And really quick before I get i'm just I have some settings that I know are going to work for this i'm just going to set the mass to two so they've got a little bit more weight and then leave these other things alone by default.  And before I go further with this what I want to do is apply a fall off so that you should one of these things looks a little bit different and it doesn't have to be complicated i'm just going to use a.  Shape fall off and what i'm going to do is use this fall off to modify.  Those different physical characteristics of the spring modifier and that'll make sense in a second.  I'm going to preview fall off the auto fit button here on shape fall offs is going to automatically fit the.  The shape function to the bounding box of the objects that you have contained so if I just hit this real quick it's going to roughly fit the exact bounds of this so i don't have to really dial this in.  Now i'm going to go to the spring modifier and start messing around with expressions so quick example if I turn this on you can set the the same physical characteristics the mass the dampening or the spring constant using these values and if you're ever confused about the labels here a lot of the time the parameter names like if I hover over this example this is D that's your damping if I hover over this spring constant is K so that's what this is pointing to.  With vex it's a lot easier to keep your variable names short which is why they look like this and K comes from a hoops law it's like a physical function so i'm using conventions there but if you're ever not sure what these things are supposed to be connected to hover over the parameter names and usually that's where you'll find the hint.  But what I can do now is I can I can modify these values for example mass I can multiply against.  I'm going to disable this first so you can see what this looks like alright sorry not this i'll disable the expression here so if I run spring modifier on this you can see that every one of these things bounces evenly play back one more time.  It goes down and then pops back up and then you get this nice little spring motion at the end.  If I enable this expression now i'm using this fall off to modulate the mass directly which is not something you would really easily be able to do without a expression.  And now when I pull this down you can see that that one just flew off into space but.  They're all they're all going to be sort of understanding the mass differently so.  Real quick the reason that's happening is because these guys on this end.  Their fall off value is zero and so I effectively made a bunch of boxes with zero masks which looks a lot does not like because now there these boxes are photons they have no mass at all and they're going to fly off into infinity so what I can do to fix that is going to the shape fall off.  Remap i'm going to enable fit and then just change my output minimum to be something very small.  And now I never have anything that's completely massless and so if I rerun the simulation.  Everything's everything's fine.  So every pretty much every modifier in mobs has the ability to use expressions to modulate things and when you're in any situation where you want to change something that's not easily affected by a fall off.  And then you have to do it.  And you have to do it.  And you have to do it.  And you have to do it.  And you have to do it.  And you have to do it.  And your expressions don't have to be complicated.  A lot of the time it's just as simple as going in and multiplying some parameter against a fall off or some other attribute you have.  It can pretty much be any point attribute because everything in mobs with few exceptions is running on points.

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\mops-motion-operators-for-houdini-part-2\frame_011.jpg

### Setup [46:53]
**Transcript:** Any other questions before I keep going.  I'm going to show you that a lot of people don't really know about is mobs and neighbors.  And it's kind of a weird one.  It doesn't get that much use.  And I.  I think it's just because the utility of it is very specific.  But essentially, if you remember the plexus effects, which I think was something that cinema 4D had. Am I right?  And it's about drawing connections between things.  And doing it a way that is.  Configurable in a few different ways.  So just to show you what this looks like.  You know, in an easy, easy mode here, I'm going to just.  Drop down a sphere and an instanceer.  And let's.  Again, let's set this to be a fixed number.  I'm just going to make a 10 by 10 grid of these spheres.  And then let me just grab the global transform and scale them down until.  We have separation here.  So I've just got this simple grid is spheres.  And I'm going to put down a noise modifier, I guess. Yeah, let's just add some noise.  And I'm going to have this effect.  You know, obviously just the position.  And that might be a little intense.  And I'm just going to turn on time varying.  And so now I have all these guys wiggling around.  Now I'm going to drop down mobs neighbors, which is listed as a tool node because it's not quite a generator and it's not quite a modifier.  It's its own weird thing that'll make more sense once I turn it on here.  So.  When you first drop down neighbors, there's two modes.  There's find neighbors and connect to them.  And what mobs neighbors is actually doing under the hood is it's finding nearby points and establishing a relationship with them.  And what that looks like is this attribute here and the spreadsheet, which is just an array.  And this is an array per point of all of the things that this point is associated with.  At its simplest, it's basically going to work like connect adjacent pieces or connect adjacent points does which are built in nodes that you might be familiar with if you're trying to do constraints.  And so that's what I'm going to draw polylines between things.  And these two outputs one of them is just here is a pass through these are your same pack primitives coming out the other side. So if I drop down a null here.  It's exactly the same as what I was just displaying.  But on the right side.  You have the actual primitives here.  And I'm real quick. I'm just going to apply some color to these so that we can see them separately a little bit better than red.  And then merge them back into the original stream.  And if I animate this, you can see that every frame, the neighbors are changing.  And so that these connections are constantly sort of disconnecting and reconnecting redrawing themselves over time.  I'm just going to copy this set up real quick here.  And paste it and show you a couple of different ways that you can leverage this.  And I have find neighbors set.  And maybe on this version and maybe I'm going to.  This is such radius of 0.25 is fine.  What I can do now is, again, I have the pass through here.  And the neighbors here.  And again, I can merge them together so you can kind of see what what we're looking at here.  It's just going to be what happened there.  I think my viewport stock. Sorry.

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\mops-motion-operators-for-houdini-part-2\frame_012.jpg

### Stacking Neighbors Nodes [50:46]
**Transcript:** Interesting. So a channel actually broke in a way that is kind of convenient.  But I'm not sure why it pasted this way. Let me just grab this neighbors again.  Okay. So what I wanted to show you is that, again, if I animate this, you can see that this neighbor's network is being re-drone every single frame.  But that's dependent on this thing called the reference frame.  If I want these connections to be established only once and then be consistent from frame to frame, I can just delete this expression, which by default is just dollar F.  It's the current time.  But I can set this to be whatever frame I want.  And so now if I scrub this, you can see that these connections don't move.  And the attributes themselves also aren't changing over time.  So it's only storing the neighbors at a given point in time.  Mops neighbors has a second mode.  That you can activate after the fact here.  That's called connect to neighbors. And so what this will do is read that array and redraw those connections after the fact.  Regardless of where they are in time.  So if I.  Down the null here.  And these are the new connections. And then we'll just template this.  You can see that now instead of those connections being re-drone and re-computed every frame where you have lines disappearing and appearing what it's going to do is stretch those lines so that they remain connected together.  And all this is just using the connect to neighbors mode. It's reading this array and then drawing those connections between those points consistently on every frame.  And there's one more way that we can use this that's a little interesting.  Just one second.  I'm going to copy roughly the same set up here.  Actually, let's do it slightly differently. I'm going to start with the same sphere grid.  But what I'm going to do is group these.  And then I'm going to turn off template.  And I'm going to call this group ends.  And what I can do with mobs neighbors is be specific about who gets to connect to who using groups, which can create slightly different effects with this if you're trying to draw specific connections between things.  And then let's create a.  And then let's move this box. And this is going to be sort of our our start object are like our master object that's actually drawing these connections.  And I'm going to just turn it into a pack primitive real quick and just need mobs convert for that.  And let's move this box off center of this of the main grid here a bit. So let's move up here and then maybe out this way a little bit.  And then let's turn the scale down considerably.  Yeah, that's fine.  And now what I'm going to do is put down a transform just a regular transform on this because I want it to just move around from the origin.

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\mops-motion-operators-for-houdini-part-2\frame_013.jpg

### Connect with Groups [54:12]
**Transcript:** And just rotate it.  Now what I have is just this guy spinning around over this group here. And then I'm going to group this and call this guy start.  And I think I don't think I want these to be primitive groups. I want these to be point groups.  And then let's do an upsteals with points. Let's just switch that over for both of these. Okay. Now, I'm going to merge these streams together.  And one thing that you might notice is you're going to see this little exclamation point because we have an attribute mismatched.  But the other thing that I want to bring up is that.  And this is something I'll go over later in the lesson.  I have multiple points with the same ID now, because I'm merging these two streams together. So you can see that this guy starts at ID zero.  one. So one thing to keep in mind is you can adjust this very easily by just going to the sorting tab  of the Instance there. And I just want this guy to start at ID1 instead. And now I don't have duplicate  ID attributes. This guy is starting at one. This guy is starting at zero and I merge them together.  I have that first guy at zero and now I have no duplicate ID attributes. This is important and I'll  go over this again later. But you want to make sure that you don't have two IDs that are the same  or else mobs is going to freak out about it. Now I can drop down mobs neighbors.  And I can put this in find neighbors tab but instead of just find nearest I can do start and end  groups. And so when I do this and then just highlight the primitives that are created here  I might need to rank my search radius a bit.  Oh, it's because I need to hit ends instead of ends like an idiot. Okay, so if I change this to ends  and then view this, now you can see I'm getting these connections. And so what it's doing is I'm  getting these connections to each of these points within this search radius per frame. And again,  this is something that you could just colorize this so it's a little bit easier for you to see.  But this is something where you could again use those time attributes if you wanted to to be specific  about what frame determines the frame that what frame determines which connections are going to be  valid and then draw those and they could stretch or they can generate each frame procedurally like  this. Let me just merge this together. So now you can see that it's drawing connections per frame  from object A to object B and you can have as many it starts and ends as you want for this thing  to be able to draw connections between. So the idea is to be able to get your classic kind of  plexus effects where you're just randomly or not so randomly connecting things together that are  nearby but with like a little bit more controlled and you get from just connect adjacent pieces alone.

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\mops-motion-operators-for-houdini-part-2\frame_014.jpg

### Delay Animation [57:18]
**Transcript:** So I am going to go to the next section here real quick just give me one second to open the file.  And what we're going to talk about now is things that modify time.  So there are a few different nodes that can change timing on things and this can make it a lot easier  to create really complex behavior from very cheap animation. So as an example really quickly  I'm going to make a new container we'll call this delay and we'll start with a really simple one.  I'm going to make a pig head match size it. So it's centroid is correct that looks fine let's scale it  down and then we'll type this into an instance there again and we'll just use the linear distribution  mode so that we can see this a little bit more clearly and I'll have these guys  moving along let's do this along x whatever I guess it really doesn't matter that much what  direction they're in. And let's make the length 10. We got these guys aligned here and then  orientation I'll just turn off a line. So I have them all facing sort of in positive z along this line.  What I'm going to do is just scale these guys up over time. So I'm going to use a mobs transform  and at frame one let's just scale them all the way down and then we'll have them scale up  over one second. So really simple boring animation and obviously this is not normally what you  would want to do like this is very boring there's not a whole lot of organic feeling behind it  but you also wouldn't necessarily have to especially if you want more complex behavior you don't  necessarily want to try to figure out exactly how to align a fall off to get this to work and  even with a fall off you can have things sort of slowly blend from one transform to the other but  you're not going to be able to get more complex behavior than that with a single fall off especially  when you're chaining together multiple animations and you want them to all sort of feel like  their time offsets for each other and so that's where mobs delay comes in. Mobs delay can be applied  to basically any point attribute or to any component of a transform. It doesn't work for  complex deformations so if you have like characters running it's going to have a harder time delaying  those and with some caveats you can't do it but I'll get into that a little bit later.  But what delay is going to do is it's going to read the fall off value of each of these and then  delay the transforms of each of these objects according to your delay amount in seconds or frames

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\mops-motion-operators-for-houdini-part-2\frame_015.jpg

### Add Falloff [60:24]
**Transcript:** depending on how you like to work times that fall off value. So you can see here if I go back  if I go back to the frame one my delay amount is 0.5 which means half a second 12 frames  and it's applied evenly to everything because all of these objects have a fall off value of one.  So if I go to frame 12 you can see that I'm still at scale 0 but by 13 this is where you start seeing  that there's actually a geometry and so they're going to just do that whole animation but half a second  too late. The power of this is obviously when you start introducing fall off so I'm just going to  put down a really simple shape fall off and let's preview this really quick I'll do the  auto-fit so now it's just 1 to 0 across the board here and then rewind turn off preview fall off  and go back to mobstile and now when I play you can see that they fade on at different times.  So this will apply to all upstream transformations so you can have as many different motions as  you want going into this and mobstile is just going to time offset all of that according to the fall  so let's go to a slightly more involved example just give me one second to set this up.  Let's make again let's just do a really simple box. I just like to when instant things I sort of like  to use match size just as a matter of course because it sort of you know fives how things are  built it's just a safe way to make sure that you know exactly what you're getting when you're going  into the instance or the copy to points up and scatter a line almost when you're using scatter  a line or any of who do you use native scattering features it almost insists that you're using  match size and everything it wants everything to be unit scale so it's a good thing to get used to.  I'm going to change the distributions so that I have let's say 10 by 10 size with a step of 1  for each of these and then I might need to just scale these guys slightly differently some  sorry just one second well this is fine yeah so these guys are all basically evenly  there you can't see any seams because we don't have wireframes enabled and all these are packed but  whatever we'll we'll start with this so what I'm going to do first is make a really simple animation  of these guys sort of appearing so again I apologize but we're going to have to set some keyframes  at frame one I'm just going to have these guys scale all the way down like the last one  and then over one second let's scale these guys up and maybe have them  you know let's have them rotate too so I'm set a keyframe here and then at one second in I'm going  to have these guys rotate 180 degrees so again pretty boring animation.  The next thing that I want to do is maybe have them all raise up a little bit so I'm just going  to put in another transform modifier after the fact the reason I'm doing this is because I don't  want the the rotations that I'm doing in this first one to get in the way and I also want to show  you that you can trade you can chain multiple transforms nodes whatever you want into this and  delay is going to work with all of them so you don't have to worry about delaying things individually  any transforms that you do up the chain are going to be delayed by a mopsilet.  So let's say maybe just a second after this certainly not even a second like maybe  a few frames after I'm going to keyframe translate and then two seconds in let's just move them

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\mops-motion-operators-for-houdini-part-2\frame_016.jpg

### Advanced Animation [64:19]
**Transcript:** up by one so now I have this sort of spin and then everything  what I can do now is I'm going to create a couple of different falloffs in order to sort of  well it'll make sense in a second I'm going to start with a plain falloff  and what I want to do is have this plain falloff animate from zero to one kind of around the same  time as this second move so let's start it here and then end it here.  It's fine if I preview this you can kind of see what I'm doing  and then I'm going to drop down a color modifier  because again color is a point attribute and so mops delay can delay this as well so what I'm  going to do is these things start like this and then they're going to turn red as they reach the  end of their their movement and then let's do another shape falloff  and let's make this spherical  I'm probably going to make it significantly larger  let's um actually I can just do this set with reset this to the defaults  set point to five and one and then I'm going to just bump this up a bit so that it's in the middle  here and just use the uniform scale so don't have to worry about my inner and outer radius  is changing too much so I think about five should do it yeah that's roughly it um and if I preview  this falloff you can see that I'm getting just this sort of radial drop off here um and now mops  delay sorry for the long wait here but the idea is to show you that any attribute can be delayed  so anything that is going to be written out as a point attribute on the spreadsheet can be  can be delayed up the chain so it's not just limited to transforms it's any point attribute  so if I run the sim now you can see that the center points are going to come in later than  the other ones and the color change also follows the same rules uh it will work for almost any  point attribute except for things that can't be interpolated like strings into your attributes will  have a little bit of trouble but almost anything else will blend evenly through the delay

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\mops-motion-operators-for-houdini-part-2\frame_017.jpg

### MOCAP Example [66:48]
**Transcript:** and one other trick that I want to show you with this with before I keep going is that um  this isn't just for packed primitives you can use this on any points so as a quick example  I'm going to grab one of the mocap bipeds like just the built-in guys let's grab number two  turn this off for a second so I can see him and mocap biped two comes with like a handful of  different motions and I just want to pick something that has a lot of movement in it so I'm just  going to grab jogging here you can see it's just this dude jogging great turn him off go back into  my network and I'm going to merge him into the scene just to show you what I mean so uh go to  mocap biped and inside mocap biped there is a geo network and I can just grab this whole thing  and now I have this dude uh as sap geometry in world space here in order to get mobs to work with  things as always you need an idea attribute and there's a number of different ways to generate that  I don't want to run mobs convert on this guy because I don't want him to be a packed primitive  I want him to stay as a mesh if you want to generate an idea attribute there's you know you can do it  in vex it's not hard um but there is actually a sap built in called enumerate  that does essentially the same thing so if I change the uh group type sorry if I change the  group type to points and then set the attribute to id now I have an id that's isn't just equal to  the point number so it's just a quick shortcut to be able to do this you could also if you wanted to  you know I do this a lot it's just use a point wrangle and then just say i at id because it's  integer attribute equals point number and it's it means exactly the same thing um but I need this  going in because mobs will not work correctly with an id attribute that's pretty important  now I can create a shape fall off and let's just make it vertical so that one side is going to be  more delayed than the other it's probably fine maybe I can scale this down just a hair so  I get more contrast uh and now I'm up select  um and I think half a second is probably fine for this yeah um but now when I run this you can see  that I'm getting this kind of weird slit scan effect um so this will work on any kind of point  geometry so if you're trying to do some more unusual deformations like or if you're not using  pack primitives for whatever if you're trying to delay some other attribute spreading across  the surface and something that is completely unrelated to mobs you can do that with polygon to  geometry or a point cloud or anything else you want it doesn't care uh so this one this one's  pretty powerful you can do a lot with it uh especially if you're kind of thinking outside the box  but for like basic motion graphics stuff it means that you can get really complicated behavior for  cheap um the only downside to using this is that it is a simulation so uh you have to be careful  about anything as a sim if you change any of your attributes upstream all the time you want to make  sure that you've got this reset simulation button uh handy so that you can recompute stuff in case  an input changes uh just keep that in mind um spring is the same way it's it's a simulation so if

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\mops-motion-operators-for-houdini-part-2\frame_018.jpg

### Keyframes Setup [70:02]
**Transcript:** you're not getting the results you expect when you change something make sure you got the reset  simulation button handy okay uh i'm going to go into the spring mod now  this one is a little bit trickier to use than delay just because there are a lot more  controls um or a lot more sort of little finicky things that you have to worry about um just as a  quick example of this i'm gonna let's do a mops explode on a sphere so each one of these  primitives now is its own separate packed primitive um and i'm just going to  i'm just gonna sweep like a quick and simple animation across like nothing fancy at all uh i just  want this thing to like grow into position and maybe rotate a few degrees so let's start with the  transform modifier and let's say i want these things to all go i don't know maybe half a unit  inwards that might be too much  well now that could still work i guess um but i am going to increase the frequency of this sphere a bit  let's change this to a polygon set of a polygon mesh and then this up to four so we've got a  decent number of points of triangles here that are all the same um and yeah let's move these guys  in by about negative point five and then scale them down to nothing uh and now before this operation  or here let's set a keyframe so that we're doing this um sorry just one second  okay let's use a falloff just to blend this out  i'm gonna move it over here i can't preview on this accurately because these have packed fragments  and i'll explain more about that later but um what i'll do is just scale this guy down a bit  move it here and then i will set a keyframe on translate here and then just a few frames in  because spring works better when you or it's more exaggerated anyways when you have things moving  very quickly i'm gonna have it animate on and we'll just do that there and now when i go to my  transform i have this kind of effect where these things are  starting kind of small it might have to push that a little bit harder  yeah there we go  okay so i have the falloff swooping entirely across and i have this motion happening  um this is kind of going opposite of the way that i want i want these things to be appearing and  not disappearing so i'm just gonna remap the shape falloff to invert that i'll put min and max  so now it's a fade on instead of a fade off and now let's do the spring mod  so what the spring modifier does is it applies hooks law uh a simple physical function to the  transforms of your primitives and so it uh anything that you do to position rotation or scale

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\mops-motion-operators-for-houdini-part-2\frame_019.jpg

### Spring Modifier [73:30]
**Transcript:** is going to be kind of run through this this simple bounce function  the spring forces are a bit hard to tune um but the three that you're sort of worried about the  three parameters here that actually matter are the mass of each object the spring constant  and the damping co-affection uh and these i'm sure these words are sort of meaningless um but basically  when you're when you're using hooks law which is like a very simple physical equation for uh like  ideal spring forces the mass of the object is basically how much does it resist change  the spring constant is a measurement of how stiff the spring is and so a much higher number is  going to be a tight spring that really wants to reach its uh it's goal uh or its rest length quickly  um whereas lower numbers are going to be more wobbly and the damping co-efficient is what  it sounds like it's sort of a measurement of energy loss during the simulation if your damping  co-efficient is one it means there's no energy loss at all uh and what that translates to in terms  of spring is it means that your object will bounce back and forth forever uh the default is point  nine because it means that you have a little bit of damping but not too much which means you get a  pretty bouncy spring but it'll eventually reach uh resting point for this one i know that i  want the maps mass to be about two and go middle of the road for the spring constant so it's a  fairly loose spring and then turn the damping down so that it quickly loses energy  and now when i do this animation you can see that things fade on like they were before but you get  this kind of wobble after the fact um one thing that i should mention with this and the one of the  reasons why these parameters can be hard to tune is because they're very scale-dependent uh so  depending on how much things are moving how fast they're moving how big your scene is uh you're  going to have to tune these on any given scene to get them right and so there's no you know the  default values are good for some things but it's not something that uh you're ever going to get

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\mops-motion-operators-for-houdini-part-2\frame_020.jpg

### Wave Example [75:27]
**Transcript:** right every time the first time you really are going to have to spend some time tuning it  i just want to do one more example if i have the time  drop down a box get some vertex normals on it and then do a grid and then a copy to points  make sure we're instant-saying great we've got a grid of cubes um i want these things to be moving  from the bottom so real quick i'm going to do a match size again um and just justify the minimum  and i did that on y oh you know what this uh i need to orient this because again grids that are  facing in positive y i touched on this in the first lesson  that grids normals and upfactor are facing the same direction so it's making all of these cubes  orient in a strange way so if i turn off auto up you can see all these things shift  and this is because now originally this grid if i were to look at the normal vectors and the  upfactor is depointing exactly the same way uh but with mobs orient mesh if i turn on visualize upfactor  and i i turn off you can see that now up is facing in a weird direction which is why the the boxes  on copying to it when i think i'm matching to why they're not uh so again let me put copy to points  on here so just to demonstrate this again if i set this back to center what i was trying to do is  get it so that they're resting on the ground plane and so i figured oh i'll set justify y just  to center or to minimum instead of center but they're all shifting in the wrong direction  and that's because of the implied upfactor when you have up and and normal facing the same way  if i turn this off and i explicitly define the upfactor and now these guys are actually going to be  sitting on the ground plane which is where i want to okay so now what i'm going to do is really  quickly i'll run a mobs convert to make sure that these guys have an ID and an A attribute  set this to pack primitives and now i've got ID and name for each one of these pieces which is great  and then let's do a transform modifier  um and i'm going to have these guys scaled down to like something very small so that they're a pancake  now and that's interesting they you may want to just be  that's right  they're scaling up from the wrong side why is that  i think that's correct  oh you know what i got to change the pivot location from the centroid origin there we go  another reason is the insensor i just wanted to show that you can if you if you need to use  vennel or vennel or vennel or who do you need work flows with this you can it's important to remember  mobs is not a closed system you can mix and match as much as you want but it does mean that you  have to worry about all these checkboxes uh and now let's do a let's do a spread fall off  i'm going to just do a quick sweeping animation from one side of the other  um and for my start point group let's just pick um you know this will look better if we're using a  longer grid let's do four by eight and then um  um  just turn this box of size down a little bit yeah so sort of display the effect a little bit  better so what i'm going to do is sweep a fall off from one side of the other and then do  another quick transform so spread fall off let's uh pick this guy as the start point  and turn on pretty fall off and i'm just going to animate this going from  animate the spread from zero to one over say just one second  just like that uh and i can add noise to this too maybe i'll make more interesting so now when  I sweep it across you can see i've got like sort of just a uh noisy running edge maybe i can  drop the frequency just a little bit okay cool um and what i'm going to do now is have these guys  all sort of uh scale up quite a bit so another transform modifier  scale this to like 200 so now as these guys scale up uh as the fall off suits across they'll  scale up and now again spring mod and i'm just going to dump in some settings here that i know we're  probably going to work for this scene scale and you can see that uh it's not just position and rotation  scale can also be sprung uh you can even affect sequence time so i'll explain this in the next  section we talk about more timing adjustments but um you can use this end delay to do the same thing to  to bake sequences that you want to adjust the timing of um this is a good way to get just like a  little bit more organic life and anything just by adjusting these parameters messing around with um  with falloffs like you can you can do a lot to sort of uh tweak the timing of those things without

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\mops-motion-operators-for-houdini-part-2\frame_021.jpg

### File Cache [81:02]
**Transcript:** having to set extra keyframes because now i want to start talking about all the sequence stuff that  i'm bringing up okay here we go it's going to turn this off really quick so sequences are a really  big thing that a lot of Houdini beginners ask about when they want to be able to have like  you know your classic flowers blooming simulation where you have all this beautiful animation of a flower  opening up and now you want to copy that to a bunch of different points and have each one be uh  different um but it turns out that that's kind of tricky to do so mobs gives you some controls for  this that are going to make your life a lot easier and i'll show you those now i'm just going to open  up a new geometry container and actually first before i do this i want to just uh make a really quick  easy sequence like a looping animation that we can work with um i'll use biped one for this because  he just has this built-in walk that's really simple uh and i know how many frames long as it is so  it's easy to start with i'm just gonna turn him off and then dive inside this network  the one trick with um with sequences and mobs when you're adjusting timing of  things that are deforming things that aren't just rigid transformations is that they have to be baked  you have to cache them to disk first or they won't work um so if you're just you know translate  rotate scaling things then you can use tricks like mobs delay or other things like that but if you  need to do something that's deforming and you do adjust the timing of a deforming animation  it has to be cached to disk and it can be either cached as an ellenic or as a packed disk sequence or  as a series of files um and i'll show you what that looks like in a second i'm going to just go into  mocap biped one here and again find the geometry network inside and then merge him in so  now i've got this walking sequence here um and i happen to know i'm going to make a rough geometry  output and it's fine to just use the default here uh i get you know it doesn't matter whatever you  want to call it i'm going to call the name walk so that the sequence at least comes out with that  name when it writes so i'll have yeah untitled walk one dot bgeo and then i'm going to change the

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\mops-motion-operators-for-houdini-part-2\frame_022.jpg

### Import Sequence [83:20]
**Transcript:** frame range um i happen to know that this loops at about frame 26 so i'm going to write  from one to 26 and then just save this disk right now and if i just if i just set the file  stop at the default options once i get past that that frame um if i scrub past it's going to throw  an error because there's no longer anything there but this is only one way that you can load geometry  there's also something if you go to um load all geometry there's something called a packed disk  sequence and this is basically a special kind of packed primitive that hudini will look stream from  disk at render time if i switched a packed disk sequence uh you can see that it just turns it  into a box the hudini uh the mobs instanceer by the way will load packed sequences i'm i think i  showed you that in the first lesson but if i didn't you can pump uh files in directly and it will  load them as packed disk sequences automatically if i set this to full geometry instead of bounding  box now i can actually see the sequence the one downer is that you have to tell hudini specifically  exactly how many files are in the sequence so i'm going to change this again to one to 26 because  i know that's how long it is and now when i scrub a loops uh which is great because by default uh  loading a hudini file sequence like this you won't get that and b you have other modes right you can  you can mirror you can clamp so if i hit mirror he's going to walk forwards and then walk backwards  and just sort of bounce back and forth indefinitely um you can also clamp so that he'll do one cycle  and then stop but it won't he won't disappear he won't throw errors um you can also load uh alemics  x  point to that walk dot abc and similar um but you you have a you don't have the ability to set any of  these abilities like rap modes um the differences between using packed disk sequences and alemics  are mostly about uh preference and pipeline um packed disk sequences are really efficient to load  hudini uh it sort of treats it as a delayed load so if you have a really dense scene the really  efficient it support motion blur and they support subframe interpolation so if you're trying to do  like a real slowmo scene and you do adjust the timing on a packed disk sequence uh hudini, mantra  and karma all know to sort of interpolate the between lines like between on subframes which can be  really handy when you're doing slowmo or when you're doing really drastic timing adjustments  the downside is that packed disk sequences generally aren't well supported by third-party renderers  so if you're using mantra karma you're fine um but if you're using something like uh red shift or  Arnold uh different render engines might have different levels of support for hudini geometry but  a j- or for packed sequence sequences specifically but in general they're not well supported uh and  just one other quick thing i want to point out when i highlight this you can see that this packed  sequence when i click on this is a single point uh packed disk sequences are packed primitives if  i middle mouse on this you can see that it's just reading one packed sequence uh and if i go into  the spreadsheet here you can see i've got intrinsics and a few of them are file names and this is  basically an array of every single file in path in that sequence there's also the index which if i  turn file names off you can see as a number and this is actually pointing to which file in the  sequence we're loading and you can um but it's pointing to it in a weird way because it's you know  at frame 130 it's index 129 but uh that's sort of applying the cycling behavior after the fact  under the hood so it can get a little confusing but this is how hudini understands how to load  this geometry is again using these sneaky hidden attributes so olemics are much more widely supported  um and again uh olemics when you load them in aren't necessarily olemics uh they're usually being  loaded and by default as delayed load primitives which is something that a lot of render engines  understand and it's also very lightweight hudini doesn't need to uh open these things up and expose  them as polygon geometry it can just stream them in from disk which makes them very efficient um the  downside is that they don't have any of the built-in controls for cycling behavior or uh any of the

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\mops-motion-operators-for-houdini-part-2\frame_023.jpg

### Instance File [87:28]
**Transcript:** stuff or the subframe interpolation that you get from back to sequences  another way that you can load files from disk is by using a point attribute called  instance file it's a string point attribute called s dot instance file um let me just i'm  just gonna make like a point in space here and then drop down a point wrangle and i apologize  for the expression i'm about to put in here because it's really ugly but this is sort of the  third way that you can use to delay load things and this is a big ugly expression that's basically  loading that same walk cycle that i just dropped in um as a as a seek as a bgeo sequence and if i  load in s file in here uh you can see that as i scrub the timeline this expression is evaluating  to the full path on disk to those bgeo files so as i scrub the timeline you can see that this file  number correlates to uh the file on disk um instance file is sort of an object level thing it doesn't  really work in soft networks so if i go to the object level uh you may or may not yeah you might not  see it sometimes you'll actually see the instances load in the viewport but it's not super reliable  instance file is compatible with most third-party render engines redshift included uh it's very flexible  uh you can point to any path on disk you want but the the downside is that this this really sucks  to write like you don't want to have to build these expressions every single time it's kind of  nightmarish to work with um it's gonna put a switch down here so we can compare these three things a  little easier the other downside is that if you want to adjust the timing on any of these options  for example if you want to adjust the timing on this packed sequence uh you have this index attribute  but you have to set this so you're you would have to use vax to say set prim and trinzic  set the index attribute to be the exact frame number per instance that you want to work with  um on the olympic if i switched here you have similar intrinsics like uh ebc frame  which annoyingly enough is not actually a frame it's actually referring to the time in seconds  so you have to make that calculation under the hood figure out exactly how many seconds in you want  this olympic to to play and uh you're the cycling is up to you you don't have uh olympics will not  automatically cycle they don't have any built-in modes for this it's just gonna play and then stop  so you would have to do any of the math to make that work and then obviously this like you're you're  sort of you you just have to write this out manually and hope that you get it right  so here comes mops set sequence time treats all of these things is exactly the same problem  it doesn't care what you put in all it wants to know is what frame index you want  and if you want to set a cycling mode or override an existing one so for example if i go to this  first one um and i have you know right now it's it's matching the frame index to  exactly what the current frame is right so it's just saying frame um but i could set this to  frame plus 20 and now he's gonna move and start walking again uh so i just time off set him by 20  frames pretty easily uh you can also adjust the cycling mode so even after the fact although i had  already set the cycling mode when i first loaded this practice sequence i can override this and  say well actually i want this guy to mirror and now he's gonna walk forwards and then backwards again  maybe i want him to you know i don't want that time off set anymore so you can you can set all this up  very easily just for and this is just for a single uh a single guy using expression you also have  the ability to use attributes to control this which i'll go over in a second um and the same thing  goes for a limbic so if i switch to this olympic mode i don't have to worry about the different

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\mops-motion-operators-for-houdini-part-2\frame_024.jpg

### Set Sequence Time [91:30]
**Transcript:** intrinsics i don't have to worry about the different timings and i can override the cycling mode here  pretty easily i do have to set a frame range for this because olympics by default don't  determine what the frame range is and so if you're loading in an olympic and you want to control the  timing of it using set sequence time you're gonna want to enable this and tell it what is the frame  range that i want to iterate over but now it's the same thing so walking forwards now he walks backwards  and this is a behavior that you can't get built in with olympics or i could just set him to cycle  and now i have a walk cycle being driven by an olympic instead which is great because now i  can control it and still use third-party renderers and the same thing goes for if i'm using  instance file and this is harder to visualize just because the viewport oh now it's showing it go figure  but now you can see that this is using the instance file point attribute to load these things off  of disk and i'll just expand this so you can see it of course it's not updating in the viewport  it's great um but it would render i apologize for the weird 2d need viewport issues but it would render  but you can see that it's going through this list of bgofiles but then once it reaches the end point  make sure i've got the set correctly  there we go so now you can see that when i reach frame 26 it pops back to frame 1 so  it's going to do all of the complicated you know annoying math to cycle all these things or to  clamp them or to mirror them whatever it is that you want based on the frame rate you provide and  you don't have to think about it so this comes especially in handy when you're trying to load  something like a redshift or an Arnold proxy file because both of those render engines support  the ability to use instance file to be to instance things from disk and so if you have a really  complex set of redshift proxies sequences that you've animated you can copy them to these points  or use this instance file method with sequence time to have whole crowds of things loading in  as redshift proxies which are really efficient and you won't run out of VRAM rendering them  so let me just go in a little bit deeper with this sequence stuff just so you can better see  how this works i'm going to start a new geometry container here and let's let's look at that same  olympic that we made last time so i'm going to bring in that same walk cycle and then i'm going to  let's do another grid and an orient mesh i'm just i'm just going to do the same thing i did before  where i am explicitly defying an up factor and then copying to points  and one one thing that i should note is that i am not turning on packed it pack an instance here because  if i middle mouse on this these are already packed they already have packed transforms i don't want to  change that after the fact so now i have this whole army of dudes strolling but again because it's  an olympic they're all doing the same thing uh and they're all clamping at the end of the sequence  because that's the intended behavior of olympics uh so i'm going to put down a shape fall off  and let's just auto fit this to the scene and then yeah okay preview fall off we've got like a  clean even fall off value going across the whole thing and now let's use that sequence time again  so what i can do with this is instead of just using an arbitrary expression i can use an attribute  and that attribute by default is mobs fall off because it's kind of expecting you to do this sort  of thing instead of set what i can do because if i set uh right now you can see that none of these

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\mops-motion-operators-for-houdini-part-2\frame_025.jpg

### Offset Sequence [95:25]
**Transcript:** guys are moving because they're all just reading the mobs fall off value and setting that as the  current frame index and fall off is just between zero and one so that doesn't help us much  i'm going to go back to the shape fall off and i again i know that the sequence is exactly  26 frames long so if i turn on fit i can change my output maximum to 25  so now my mobs fall off value is all these random numbers between  zero and 25 going across uh going across this whole geometry stream and i'm going to change the  mode to add so what this is going to do now is take that fall off value and add it to the time  index of each one of these sequences because these are olympics i i have to enable these two  override so i'm going to turn on cycling mode instead of cycle i'm going to make sure that this  thing knows that the frame range is one through 26 once i've done that now you can see that all  of these guys in each row based on that fall off are in a different step and if i scrub the timeline  you can see that all the timing is offset and they're looping because i have the looping behavior  configured so if i were to go back to this fall off and let's say add some noise and i can you know  maybe i can crank the amplitude of that a bit now you can see that these guys are like slightly  offset within each row and i can drive that even further if i need like a lot more noise i can uh  yeah remap this so that it's a lot more a lot stronger in certain areas let's try uh  output min of like many more frames max or i could use a noise fall off you know it's kind of up to you  but you can get a lot of variation from this for cheap all you have to do is compute a point attribute  it doesn't matter what it is for example i could just say uh in a point wrangle if i just wanted to  completely randomize this using fax instead of a fall off i could say say offset equals uh  phyto1 sorry about the vex if you're not really a vex person yet but i'm just going to generate a random  number based on the on the point number that generates a number between zero and one which is what  phyto1 is meant to work with so i'm going to set the offset to the random number anywhere between  zero and the full length of the sequence 26 so now i have a point uh the attribute called offset  this is completely random between those two numbers i'm going to set the attribute name to offset  the match and now each of these guys is completely random in the sequence at their walking so this  again it's a way to just sort of open up your ability to define the timing exactly for each one  of these things um just let me look at real quick yeah that's that's as far as i'm going to go with  this specific demo um the one thing that i want to point out here is that who do you need's viewport  when dealing with time offset sequences like this is very fussy and it will not it will sometimes  lie to you uh especially when you're when you're doing time off sequences offset sequences like this  and you have a lot of objects uh you might see see things start to to run in lockstep even though  you don't have them configured that way the first thing to check is again to make sure that you have  these override set if you're not working with uh packed disc sequences you need to enable those  the other thing that you can do assuming that your sim isn't too busy is unpacked to check  and unpack will always give you the right answer so if things aren't looking right uh isolate a small  part of your scene and test with an unpack just to make sure um but the reason why you want these to  leave these things packed except for testing is watch how slow it is for me to scrub the timeline when

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\mops-motion-operators-for-houdini-part-2\frame_026.jpg

### Q&A: RS Suggestions [99:03]
**Transcript:** i've got these guys unpacked versus a bunch of sequences that i can stream in from disk and i can almost  play this in real time  yeah um redshift has a packed proxy stop as well that you can load and if i were to pull in i don't  know if i have a rs proxy like ready to go here but this file actually sets the same instance file  attribute so if you bring in a redshift packed proxy load in a sequence and then copy this to points  or use the mobs instance or with it you can pipe this directly into sequence time and it'll work  uh like you'd expect the one downer to this is that when you're using this workflow it can be uh  especially if you're time offsetting things um the viewport will lie to you and there's no easy way  to tell uh what the timings are going to be on them until you render in redshift uh just as a  as a caveat uh read the whatever redshift is doing to um load that instance data uh at this point  in your sub graph even if you change the timings later by modifying the instance file point attribute  the viewport won't reflect that so keep that in mind for redshift specifically when you're using

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\mops-motion-operators-for-houdini-part-2\frame_027.jpg

### Example Setup [100:21]
**Transcript:** the the the instance file workflow uh with redshift with this stop um you're not going to be able to  see the time offsets in the viewport but it will render okay let's go onto the next section it's  just going to take me one second to load this up okay there's two really important parts of  transforming things in mobs that i've kind of glossed over before but i want to go over them in a  little bit more detail and that's the mobs pivot modifier and the mobs reorient modifier  mobs you might have also seen mobs align early on uh they essentially mean the same thing mobs pivot  and mobs align are are the same no just aliases of each other but what this lets you do is adjust  the pivot points of uh of your geometry in a way that's a little bit uh easier than trying to do it  just with the intrinsics uh so let's do a quick pivot demo i'm going to make a poll  and a grid and same as before i'm going to use orient mesh to just get myself like decent starting  attributes for this i'm going to turn off auto up and then copy to points  and let's make sure we're instant syncing for this one grab the first output of the test geometry

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\mops-motion-operators-for-houdini-part-2\frame_028.jpg

### Bounding Box Alignment [101:41]
**Transcript:** so that i get this field of polls so the next thing that i want to do is just drop down a transform  modifier  so by default in hudini when i'm packing things it's going to pack at either the centroid or the  origin and that can be problematic when you want things to be stuck to the floor or you want to be  specific about where that pivot is because you don't you know it's kind of option A or option B  and so a lot of the time when you run into the issues with pivots and the copy stop you kind of  have to put a transform in before you're copied a point to like nudge your geometry around and it can  be tricky to do it because you're not always in the right space uh you have to start like kind of  looking at things backwards to make the pivots line up so as an example if i scale everybody down by  50% here you can see that they're hovering well over the ground just because of where they're packed  as an alternative if i put down a mobs pivot here upstream i can say a line to bounding box negative  y and now these guys are going to scale i can just toggle this on and off you can see that now they're  scaling from their own local negative y and you could have this working on any side of the bounding  box so i could adjust to him anyway like uh using these quick controls um and this is just for bounding  box alignment there's a lot more options that i can show you but what this means is that all  transformations are going to happen relative to negative y and that's not just for scaling it's  for rotations as well so if i rotate on x you can see that he's rotating at the point between his  feet according to the sort of the center of the bounding box at the minimum y um that's what

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\mops-motion-operators-for-houdini-part-2\frame_029.jpg

### Example Misc. [103:34]
**Transcript:** this quick control here means it's like it wants to align to one center of the bounding box or  the center on two axes and then either the minimum or the maximum on the on the alignment side that  choose here as another quick example just one second i'm going to drop down a box put some  normals on it and then um let's just do a quick insensor i'm going to set up a five by five cube  so i'm going to change the fixed number five five five increased the distance a bit  there we go so now i've got this cube here  and i just want to show you what uh just a little bit more about how you can sort of think about  if it's using the mops so i'll put down another transform modifier here and just have all these guys  spin uh let's do frame times five so you know this from the first uh mops lesson but when mops  applies transforms the things it's applying them to each point individually right so every one of  these is going to be rotating around its own local center or depending on where that pivot is  instead of the transform software it would treat everything is the same but  we can do the same thing with mops and actually keep it loose and be able to change this after  effect by using pivot at multiple times in the stream here so uh what i can do is just i don't  want to do center pivot what i do want to do is set the pivot in world space there's a lot of  different options that you have here but default you can have center pivot you have a line to  bounding box are really simple ones but you can also dial in exactly how you want to shift the pivot  or you can set the pivot per object in either local or world space if i set the pivot to be zero  in world space and then apply the mops transform modifier and this might be a little easier to see  what is happening to the pivots when i um when i run this if i delete geometry but you keep the points  you can see that all of the points now are you can't really see through that nomen but they're all  at zero everything is at the origin 100 percent what mops pivot does is it adjusts those pivots after  the fact but it keeps the geometry in the same place so that means that future transforms are going  to be done around that pivot per object so now that i have this pivot defined here if i go back to  my transform modifier every object is pivoting around the same location and so now it's acting as a  single block when i transform it um and you could in theory if you wanted to animate these in order  to to mess things up uh get and get a little stranger with it i'll show you real quick what i mean um  let's do a box and a tube and i'm going to set the box to be  give it alone but add for our text normals and then this tube i'm going to set to be oriented to  z i'm going to give him end caps and i want to make it less of a tube and more like a a hexagon

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\mops-motion-operators-for-houdini-part-2\frame_030.jpg

### Rolling Animation [106:38]
**Transcript:** so let's just uh turn the columns down to six  let's move them off center so he's not right on top of that box there we go i'm going to merge these  guys together so what i'm going to do is is roll these guys around um and i'll show you what that looks  uh what i want to show you is how you can use pivots to dynamically adjust over time where things  are moving so that you can for example have things uh stuck to the ground so i'm going to do a  mob to convert to turn both of these guys into packed primitives uh so that's already ready to go  um and now what i'm going to do is give each of these guys like a a walk cycle  sounds weird but what i'm just going to really quickly use a transform modifier to  um to just set like a quick and dirty rotation so starting at frame one i'm going to key rotate z  and then let's do like frame eight we're going to have it rotate 90 degrees  uh and i did this after the merge i do want to apply this just to the cube because each of these  guys is going to need to have a separate uh a separate walk cycle right separate roll cycle so i'm  setting the group to be zero so it's only affecting the cube and then i'm going to just add a  break in here maybe yeah let's just step in there and then set another key and then from here to let's  say 28 i'm going to rotate to 180 degrees i'm just doing two little quick steps so you can see what  this looks like so one two uh and then let's do another one for the tube this time  and i'm going to start him same way at rotate over the first eight or so frames  uh and again i want to set this to be primitive one so i'm just using this to quickly grab the  group masks and i'm only transforming this guy uh so it's up to 60 because this guy has six sides  so he's going to rotate by 60 degrees per side so now i have a one turn and let's just do a break and then  you know same deal we'll start around here and then right around this point we'll do  120 so real boring right but what i can do with this is with mobs pivot  and if you've ever watched the any of the mobs plus tutorials there's a little animation that i do  that's kind of following the same principle of like that little cube that dances around to that  stupid song um what i can do is i can say a line to be box negative y but i can turn off pivots only  and so what this means is that instead of adjusting just the pivot point at which this thing moves  it's going to move the entire primitive according to the pivot shift that we set so if i  turn this off now you can see that these guys are suddenly aligning themselves to the ground to  negative y but the the the primitives are moving so if i have these guys sort of centered over something  and rotating it around on like a ground plane or on you know some other arbitrary object i can use  this to lock them in place so now because this pivot shift is happening after the transform it's  going to pay attention to rotations so as this guy as that square rotates you can see that he's  sticking to the ground and then snapping back down again right now this guy isn't working well because  as it turns out the way that it's doing the bounding box calculations is by a very sort of loose  bounding box that's according to the packed primitive as like an imaginary cube instead of actually  paying attention to the shape of the object if you turn on accurate bounds it's going to be a  slower process but now you can see that this guy is accurately pivoting off of each of those sides  as it rotates so there's a lot of unexpected stuff that you can do with mobs pivot that you  wouldn't really think of stuff like this that can make it a lot easier to get more interesting

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\mops-motion-operators-for-houdini-part-2\frame_031.jpg

### VEX Sin Expression [110:56]
**Transcript:** animation without having to constantly counter animate to get things to fit which i'm sure some  of you guys have run into before i just want to do one more example as far as like really weird  behavior that you can get out of this because adjusting pivot points can be really strange  i'm just gonna make another cube scale down a bit get vertex normals and then drop down another  instance i'm gonna do another let's do another fixed grid let's do like a five by five  crank the distance up a bit so we can get these guys away from each other and then i'm gonna do a mobs  pivot and what i want to do with this is shift the pivots but i'm going to do it using a  vex freshen so apologies for the vex here but i'm gonna turn on shift pivot mode and what this  means is that it's gonna be and you can see when i move it along why you can see the pivot points  raising up into the air what i'm gonna do is use an expression to sort of just animate this over  time in a weird way so i'm gonna create a temporary attribute i'm calling y and i'm just gonna say  this is equal to the sign of time plus the point number and then multiply that by four so it's  gonna generate a value between well you'll see what i mean but it's it's gonna generate a value  between negative one and one at a given frequency and it's gonna be offset by the point number so each  point is going to evaluate slightly differently and i can just say pivot dot y is equal to that  temporary variable i just created and so if i you can see that if i scrub the timeline that the  pivots are just dancing around up and down but any future transform that i do with mobs is going to  be paying attention to those pivots so i can just set a simple transform like let's say  rotate by frame times 10 so really simple transformation but because of the pivot animation that i've  done upstream i can get sort of really weird and complicated behavior out of this for cheap and

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\mops-motion-operators-for-houdini-part-2\frame_032.jpg

### Basics Setup [113:19]
**Transcript:** this is you know these are simple expressions i could modulate this a lot more to get like really  chaotic behavior out of these things without that making frames  the next thing i want to go over is mobs of reorient which is another tool node that has a few  very specific use cases but it's really handy for doing to the orientation of a transformatrix  what pivot does to what mobs pivot does to the pivot point of each packed primitive so to show you  what i mean i'm gonna start with field pig heads and then another instancer just making copies of  stuff and i'm just gonna turn down the scale of these guys and then zoom in so i can see it a little  more clearly yeah there we go and then really quickly i'm just gonna randomize the orientation  so i've got this grid of pig heads and they've all got completely random orients  um what mobs reorient lets you do is basically tell future mobs operators of what you want the  axes of rotation to be and it lets you do that without having to unpack the primitive so it's  sort of applying a pre-transform attribute to two year points and then future mobs nodes will  read that and say oh okay those are the rotation axes that i should be using instead um  what it but it lets you do this without unpacking which is a big deal because otherwise the  transform and transics are what they are and if you want to rotate locally around other axes later  you have no way of controlling that uh with vanilla hudini unless you are want to get really weird  with the math under the hood so to demonstrate this if i'm doing let's say a mobs transform  and i want these guys to just be doing the usual the same spinner rune demo i do every time so  frame times five and why by default these guys are all gonna be rotating along their own local axes  right so they're gonna be spinning randomly but if i want that spin access to be something more  specific but i don't actually want to rotate the objects to get there that's where mobs reorient comes  into play so let's drop down a mobs reorient before this transform what it's going to be looking for  as the object it wants to deal with is two things the orient source can either be a point attribute or  it can be a reference geometry and i'll show you what the reference geometry thing means in a second  but with point attribute what i can do is either feed it a quaternion attribute which is how orient  it's like a four-dimensional vector which is how orient usually works if you look at a spreadsheet  it's four numbers they're incomprehensible don't bother trying to understand what they mean  or you can use two vectors so you can provide an end in an up attribute or you can provide a matrix  attribute it's up to you how you want to step it up um what i'm gonna do is upstream of this  i'm just going to create a new orient attribute and it doesn't have to be named orient can be  whatever you want but i'm going to say orient is equal to zero zero zero one i happen to know that  this is the identity orientation this just means default z-facesy upfacesy you know it's like a  it's a pass-through it means no transformation so i'm going to set this and then tell mobs orient  or mobs reorient that i want to use that attribute to define my new axis of rotation now when i  run the mobs transform modifier i'm still in local space and these guys are still all scrambled around  here but when i do the spin they're all going to be rotating along the same axis and that's the one  that i defined up above so any future mobs operator that i use here is going to treat this as the

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\mops-motion-operators-for-houdini-part-2\frame_033.jpg

### Reverse Setup [117:15]
**Transcript:** starting orientation uh or treat this number this this zero zero zero one as the starting orientation so  it's a it's a pre-transform almost i hope i'm explaining this clearly but this means that it's new  local axes if i in fact if i do a visualized frame hopefully this visualizer will work you can see  that uh without the reorient the blue axis the forward axis is pointing you know according to each  pig head but when i turn this on you can see that mobs visualize frame is saying oh okay these things  are all completely facing the same direction based on those rotation axes that i set you can see  that they're spinning along with it the advantage being that uh if you wanted to do this using native  you do need tools you would probably have to unpack or you'd have to compute this offset yourself  and then repack after the facts after you've done your randomization so another real quick example  i'm just gonna grab uh these two guys here copy this setup  um and i'm going to use attribute randomize  and let's just say i'm gonna make something called my orient  and set it to be four-dimensional uh direction or orientation so doing exactly the same thing  really is as what mobs are animized is doing but i'm not applying this to these objects so everything  here i've got this you know i could even call this orient if i wanted to but um all these guys are  still aligned completely forward and i'm gonna use mobs reorient to use that attribute my orient  as the new axes of rotation and now i'll just grab this same transform modifier i had before that  spinning over time and wired in here and i'm more or less doing the opposite of what i did before i  have all these guys lined up they look like they're straight and i'm doing a simple transformation  along local y but now i've scrambled local y so that it's different for each one of these instances  and so now you can see that they're all rotating different so you have total control over the rotation  axes of each of these things basically however you want to set it up um so to go back to the  orient source mode the reference geometry mode this is for situations where you want to align  your packed primitives or packed fragments or whatever they are to some other geometry like a  reference mesh that has the orientation that you want so for example i have a sphere here  i'm going to orient the mesh so that i have an orientation that transfer to and i'll just do the  usual um you know what i'll just leave on auto up it's fine i just want to have some orientation  to begin with and now i'm going to scatter some points on this

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\mops-motion-operators-for-houdini-part-2\frame_034.jpg

### Explode Demo [120:15]
**Transcript:** say i don't want a thousand let's do a hundred and then shatter it  okay turn wireframes so i can see this a little bit better okay so now i have this shattered  geometry i'm going to run this through mobs convert to turn into packed fragments now if i run a  mobs transform on this to move things outwards um the problem is that because i'm using mobs  convert on a bunch of stuff that's been scattered they have no implicit idea of what orientation  means they don't know what forward or out is so if i translate these guys in z they're all going to  move in the same direction just because of how they're created they don't have implicit transforms  they're just saying like oh okay x is x y is y is z z uh with mobs reorient what i can do is take the  orientation of that original sphere object wire that in is the second input so i'm going to grab  the output of mobs reant mesh here and apply that here and then i'm going to change this from point  attribute to reference geometry now this has an orient attribute from mobs reant mesh it also has  end up so you could use either either one like the attribute type controls are still exposed to you  but what it's essentially going to do now is transfer the orientation of these pack of these  of the original mesh to these packed chunks so if i do this before the transform we reorder this  a bit now when i move outwards it's actually using the reference orientation of that mesh  to do it so now i've got these things exploding outwards this can be really powerful when you're trying  to do things like mobs explode actually does this implicitly explode a mesh it's using mobs reorient  under the hood to configure those chunks so that everything's local transform is facing the right way  but this is a really powerful way of being able to have like simpler control over  what you're doing under the hood with with these objects and just really quickly as sort of a last demo  of this i'm just going to move these points outwards a bit let's say that um so so the mobs  orient attribute which is what's created by mobs reorient here and you can see if i go over here  there's this special attribute called mobs orient which is another quaternion just like regular  orient but it's sort of an offset that's calculated and then applied to the orientation of every other  mobs operation before it runs this is one of the few attributes that has nothing to do with vanilla  odini and doesn't translate to anything so if you know that you've got for example um  i've got all of these guys randomly rotating because the the local axes of orientation are all  different if i want to get the transform of these objects in world space i can't just read the  intrinsic like i normally would so as an example i'm going to use extract attributes  which is uh i'll go into this more in a bit which is going to pull the the transform in  trinsics and turn those back into point attributes if i then take a rubber toy and let's just  match size it  and then copy that to these same points as the original objects that i had so here's a and here's b

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\mops-motion-operators-for-houdini-part-2\frame_035.jpg

### Clarification [123:47]
**Transcript:** and i'm gonna scale this guy way down  oh i have to do that after the fact because i'm scaling a fit was to do it this way  oh it's because hey i did this on the wrong example let me just do that from this one  oh that's very interesting  i don't know why this is working it's supposed to not work um  the the point that i'm trying to make is that mobs orient is not native and so if you were to try  to just grab the transform in trinsics as they are and apply them to new objects by just copying to  the the same points you want to make sure that extract mobs orient is enabled in most of those  cases because what you want to be able to do is make it so that um in fact i wonder if this is a bug  and i just need to reverse that toggle for this example because yeah oh i say yeah it just needs to be  flipped but um with extract mobs orient on with this music it's going to apply that pre-transform  as part of the computed orientation so you can see that now this uh these guys the rubber toys  are being oriented as if the mobs reorient up the chain  i have this these guys spinning along why right even though their orientations are all  completely randomized so this is not a bug this is just me getting confused because i need more coffee  um if i copy these guys to these points and i don't extract mobs orient what it's going to do  is apply this the exact world rotation of each of these things as they are to those individual points  but that's not taken into account that these guys orientation axes are actually  facing straight up because of the orientation change that i made earlier so with extract  orient on what it's going to do is apply that pre-transform to the the template point attributes  that this node creates so that now these guys are all facing the same imaginary orient

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\mops-motion-operators-for-houdini-part-2\frame_036.jpg

### Explanation [126:17]
**Transcript:** orientations that we made with mobs reorient i'm sorry for the confusion i hope that this makes sense  after the facts that's what this flag is for when you're when you're dealing with uh orientations  that are generated by mobs reorient i hope that makes sense okay just give me one second to open up  the next file so speaking of extract attributes i want to talk really quickly about the api  nodes that are sort of the core of what goes on within mobs under the hood um and there's there's two  main api nodes that are involved in mobs um and you'll find them in almost every node inside mobs  if you dive inside any of the nodes and i encourage you to do so but the two nodes that you're going to  be working with are called apply attributes and extract attributes we'll talk about extract first  because it's super simple um i'm just going to create a let's do uh  so we're running low on time so i might just copy this network over just to make it easier for  you and then step through just for this example really quick  so what i'm doing is starting with a pig head and then instanting it into a grid  and then randomizing a bunch of stuff so the same sort of demo i've done many many times where  i'm just instant thing and then randomizing what's going on with them and then i'm going to  rotate these guys slowly over time so these are similar tricks that i've done a million times  already um and then what i'm going to do is run extract attributes what extract attributes does  is it takes these transform and transics all these secrets in here and the pivot and  transic and all these other things that are applied to each one of these objects whether or not  use them with mobs it doesn't care and it's going to turn those back into template point attributes  so this is sort of the translator to take the packed data that lives inside every packed primitive  and turn it back into template point attributes like scale up and orient all of that stuff  what that allows you to do is then go back um you know to copy the points after the fact like now I  have this rubber toy we're going to match size so that it's a unit scale and then copy to points  and so if i toggle from 8 of b and this might be a little bit hard to see these guys are all oriented  and scaled the same way as they're rubber toy predecessors just template that so you can see that  all these guys are facing exactly the same way and the whole point of extract attributes and it's

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\mops-motion-operators-for-houdini-part-2\frame_037.jpg

### Bullet Sim Example [128:52]
**Transcript:** pretty simple no to use is to just make sure that you can translate from the intrinsics to template  attributes and then use that to do other calculations later on on the points where mobs likes to work  another thing that i want to point out and again i'm going to just because i don't want to bog us  down with too much uh stuff that you that we don't need to go over twice i have another quick set up  here and this is inside the hip file that i uploaded inside one or two dots hip this is part of  api nodes dot hip um what i'm doing here just to step through this really quickly turn off the  templating flag i've got this peghead here i'm going to move it upwards and then turn it into a volume  scatter points and shatter it this is a workflow that you guys should probably be familiar with  it's a really easy way to shatter geometry so now this guy is fractured into a bunch of different  points so i can run a mobs convert to turn this into packed primitives and then run it through a  simple bullet solver so all i'm doing is putting this through the rbd bullet solver um and then  just run simulation for a few frames so it's just crumbling there's no constraints there's  nothing other than gravity in a ground plane it's all very simple on the other side what i'm doing  here is running a subdivide and then basically i'm just adding a bunch of noise and like making  these things more complicated so now i have this super you know this is my high-rise geometry  so what i can do is take the results of this bullet simulation because bullet is is just working on  pack on packed primitive intrinsics the same as anything else uh i can extract those attributes  and then apply them which i'm going to get to in more detail in a second to that high-rise geometry  so it's a little bit like the transform pieces up um but what i'm doing is taking those intrinsic values  and then just assigning them to this high-rise geometry which is also packed primitives and so now

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\mops-motion-operators-for-houdini-part-2\frame_038.jpg

### Explanation [130:54]
**Transcript:** i'm getting this high-rise geometry being run through this simulation very similar to transform pieces  but um i'll show you what i'll show you next in detail sort of what apply attributes can do because  it's a very powerful node  okay uh so now we're going to go on to apply which uh is where things can get really interesting  make a degenerative container so apply attributes is v-node in mobs it's responsible for most of what mobs can  do um i'm going to drop down a grid and then use an ad-soft to just turn this into points  and then let's make a pickhead and copy to points  make sure we're packing  and then just scale this guy down of it  okay so what i'm going to do now is mess with some template point attributes on these original  points here uh so i'm going to hang on to these and sort of a separate stream i have my packed  information here exactly hundred packed primitives and i have my points here and i've  i've already copied these point to points so these intrinsics are are set uh but what i can do is  let's uh let's drop down attribute noise and have it affect p so  don't really need to be too specific with this i guess i'll zero center it  um but yeah i won't change anything else i'm just i'm random i'm sort of scrambling p  and let's do the same thing to um and an up because we we're not locked to just working with  the orient attribute if it's easier for you to think about it this way we can use n and up as well  because all of these are supported um so i'm going to adjust the n vector um and i'm just going to  adjust with random so i'm going to get a random n for each one of these uh for each one of these  guys and then i'm just going to copy this and paste it i'm going to do the same thing to randomize  the up vector and then i'm just going to tweak the seed so i know it's not the same  and then i can do another one of these for uh scale so i'm going to set change this to scale  and then uh let's do adjustment for length only because this is not a direction vector and then  again i'll randomly adjust it between 0.5 and one for each one of these things  um so now i have all these randomized template point attributes and again i have all of these  guys as packed primitives ready to go now i'm going to use apply attributes  so the template points the points that have the attributes that i want to match go on the on  the right side and then the objects i want to modify go on the left and when i turn on the display  flag what's happening is all of those template point attributes that i set so basically the same  way that we use the copy stop i have all of these template points attributes set up um but what  apply attributes is doing is then using those attributes and modifying the transform and transics to match  um which if you already know a little bit about vex so the copy stop is pretty straightforward but um  the power in this is that you have a lot of options for how you want to do this application  so the most obvious thing that you can do that apply attributes does and this is why it's the center  of almost everything that mobs does is it pays attention to fall off so if i have a plain fall off  here and i just slide this back and forth it's going to interpolate between these two values and this  is how you know the transform modifier works this is how move along spline works all of these things

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\mops-motion-operators-for-houdini-part-2\frame_039.jpg

### Falloff Examples [134:45]
**Transcript:** are using apply attributes to basically take some value that we've set and either you know set or add  or multiply based on these modes to the intrinsic center of the hood  as another quick example um do the same thing i'm just gonna copy this here it's a  initial setup and then paste it and i'm gonna do a transform modifier on these guys here and  let's just uh let's rotate this guy these all by 90 degrees they're all facing to the right  i can also i can apply let's say the same transform to these points and like you're not going to be  able to see this but i'm rotating all of the points in the same direction if i then use apply  attributes down here by default all of these guys are going to be facing that same 90 degrees because  that's the rotation that i applied to these you know to these template points but i don't only have  the ability to set i can also add if i turn on add it means that these rotations are going to be  accumulated so now i'm doing two 90 degree rotations one from this so i'm already facing this way  and then i'm taking this 90 degree rotation as well on these points and applying it additively  and again fall off is the same way i can put down a plane fall off or some of the noise fall off  here and then interpolate to blend between the two so the power behind this is that you can use this  to sort of if you know how to set up the template attributes the way that you want you can use this  to create your own sort of mini mobs operators or your own fully fledged hdAs if you want  these api nodes are both for my own sanity so that when i'm doing these transformations i don't have to  think about the math every single time but they're also exposed that you got that any technical artist can  go in here and mess around and use them to create new effects the last thing that i want to bring up  and this is a bit overkill but let's say i have a template head here and i want to  zoom in really quick and i'm just going to apply similar attribute noise to the point position  that's excessive so let's uh turn that strength way down and turn the element size way down but  what i want to do is just kind of mess this guy up a little bit  and then i'm going to do a shape fall off on these points  it's just auto fit review sure that's fine and maybe let's uh  invert it so that it's more powerful at the top and at the bottom i can use apply attributes  it's almost like a blend shape so uh but a weighted blend shape so now based on where the  position of the falloff is because apply attributes is is modifying template point attributes but  that includes p so if i then go into this falloff and uh animate it i can get a weighted blend  shape based on that falloff value uh and i don't necessarily recommend using it this way because

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\mops-motion-operators-for-houdini-part-2\frame_040.jpg

### Direct Simulation [138:00]
**Transcript:** it's not going to be as fast as doing like a basic vex transformation um but uh if you just  really need a quick and dirty weighted blend shape um you can do it this way for cheat  i'm going to open the file for the next section and i need just uh one minute before i keep going  okay so what i want to talk about and i'm going to try not to get bogged down in the details  is i want to talk a little bit about how you can use mobs for things that are not motion graphics  specific there's a number of different ways that mobs can interface with simulations or with um  sorry i think am i did i crash am i still here okay um  um  sorry about that just uh running into a bit of glitchiness here  but you can use mobs in a lot of different places uh that you wouldn't normally think of as motion  graphics tools so as a really quick example and again in the interest of time i'm going to be  sort of copy pasting some of these setups uh to make them a little bit quicker  instead of building them node by node and i apologize for that but i'm hoping that the  the basic stuff we've already gone over so i won't waste your time with it  so what i'm doing here is i am taking a template head and  filling it at the bottom here and then fracturing it converting it uh and then running a spread fall  off so it's stuff that you guys should probably be already be familiar with um i'm generating a bunch  of packed fragments here and then i'm going to run a spread because these are packed fragments  you're not going to be able to clearly see the spread animation because you can't preview fall off  you can't set point color individually on packed fragments so when i preview i have it set to be  displayed as sprites and now when i animate you can see sort of how the spread is working so i'm  going bottom to top uh using a spread fall off it's going to turn off fall off preview so i get my  original chunks back here and now what i want to do is i'm going to use this fall off value to  drive how the simulation runs um and this will seem pretty obvious to those of you who have done  like a fair amount of rbd since before but in this point wrangle what i'm going to do is i'm going to  modify the active attribute which is something that in rbd active defines whether an object is a  static collider meaning it doesn't move it's just there to collide against other things or whether  physical forces are going to be applied to it and i'm just going to set this to be  it's going to be equal to mobs fall off is greater than 0.99 and this might be a little bit confusing  if you're not used to writing expressions but what i'm doing is saying that because active is either  zero or one there's no in between so i'm saying is if mobs fall off is nearly one or is equal to one  then active is going to be one and so i'm saying i active equals one if it's not it's going to be zero  and so it's going to be static now what i can do is run the rbd bullet solver uh sorry it's just cold  yeah there we go bullet  and you'll notice that under overwrite attributes active is already in a year uh by default and that  just means that these objects are going to update this active state from this fall off on every frame  even though it's happening inside a simulation and so when i play this back  let's take a second you see that these chunks are activating and then falling

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\mops-motion-operators-for-houdini-part-2\frame_041.jpg

### Refine Simulation [141:55]
**Transcript:** as that spread happens so you can use this uh you can use falloffs to art direct simulations and  obviously active isn't the only attribute you can mess with but it's a powerful one to know about  um and there's others that you can you can change including i mean animated and deforming or two more  that you might uh be used to working with if you knew rbd you can change physical characteristics like  mass if you wanted to you would just have to make sure that it was added to this list for updating um  i'm gonna add a ground plane and then re-simulate a bit just go forward a little bit more  um  sorry about the simulation wait i'm sure this is going to get edited out  okay so again we have the spread falloff falling and as the falloff spreads throughout the sim the  thing crumbles um and let me just run this a little bit further too much further because i don't  want to waste anyone's time but what i want to do is sort of point out a common problem with  rbd sims where you might have um an object you don't like that's behaving weird uh and you want to  modify it so let me just uh just in again in the interest of time i'm going to copy the rbd settings  that i have from the demo file over um so that i don't have to uh boy  you can do a computer i believe in you  come on  okay this so now i'm using the same settings because i just uh i need to do this quick um  what i can do with this now is isolate specific primitives that i might want to adjust the  position at the timing of right because again rbds are just packed prims it's all the same  at the end of the day so maybe i want to get a specific object that's like out of control you know  like this guy here and i want to slow him down or i want to maybe i don't want him to go past this  point roughly so what i can do is uh last all but this primitive of this number is yeah okay uh  so delete non-selected and then time shift him  to frame 67 so now what i'm what i'm doing is i have these intrinsics from this simulation sort of  what's the word i have it kind of frozen in time like this is the goal position that i want this  thing to meet now i'm going to do is run apply attributes um and i'm going to apply it only to that  that same that same group right so i'm just going to copy this group mask and apply it as the  apply attributes group masks i'll just paste a relative reference and that should evaluate to  the same primitive and then plug in the simulation results to part a and so now what you'll see is  that guy is frozen in time at that position that let's say that this is the position that i want as  the final for that piece in the simulation now what i can do is just use plain fall-off to animate  that effect on so i want him to reach this position roughly like let's say we'll start here  and set the fall-off value to zero and start it here and then by that end frame that we chose  i'm just going to fade this transform in and this is not going to look very good uh it's going to  require some tuning to run but now you can see the whole sim runs i don't have to re-simulate  that's already done but now i can blend that transform in and so this guy sort of comes to a stop  where i need him to stop and this can apply to particle simulations too if you want but  it's especially prevalent when you're dealing with rbds because you have all these individual objects  packed transforms that if you've dealt with bullet simulations before you frequently have

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\mops-motion-operators-for-houdini-part-2\frame_042.jpg

### Constraints Setup [146:06]
**Transcript:** you know one or two objects that are just going to freak out spin around and definitely just do  other weird stuff and this is one way of making corrections to that without having to  without having to re-simulate which can be really frustrating and take a long time  okay um the second part that i want to show you is about how you can use uh some of these controls  with vellum because that's obviously a really popular solo right now it's really cool it's fast  you get interesting results from it um so if you're not familiar with vellum i'm going to  step through this quickly but i want to just make sure that you know uh each part of this  each part of this process going in so i'm starting with just the same template head that i that  i usually work with and i'm going to make a vellum cloth uh so vellum configure cloth and pipe  the geometry in and this is going to build just sort of a you know a basic list of constraints uh to  make this thing stick together it's nothing fancy at all um what i'm going to do next  uh is drop down a pin constraint um  so where is that pinned geometry?  well i'll just drop down another vellum constraints and then set the preset so i'm going to set  this to be uh pinned a target and i wire both of these things in because i have  the geometry stream and the constraint stream i need them to pass through and what i'm going to do  with this pinned a target constraint is i'm going to set it to be um soft constraints so under  pinned type i'm going to set this soft and this means that i i can set a value between zero and one  on each of these pin constraints to tell them how tightly do i want these constraints to bind to  the original geometry to keep it stuck there um it's it's almost like a a goal uh to the original  geometry that i'm that i'm pinning to uh and the other thing that i want to do to make this work is  i want to set an output group for these constraints uh for the stretch constraints involved here  i'm going to call this pin and this is so i can target these constraints specifically uh later on  um all the rest of this i can think i can i can leave as default so what i want to do with this  is i'm going to use falloffs to modulate constraint properties so that i can have things change  over time in the simulation um without having to get to to individually address notes another way  the first thing that i need to do and this is confusing but um when you're using the vellum solver's  op uh the order of the constraints isn't guaranteed who do you need to scramble your constraint order  and so the first thing that i need to do is i need to set some kind of id your index attribute  on my constraints um so that i can refer to them by name later so i'm just going to call this id  uh and set it to be it's a primitive attribute so now each of my constraint primitives  um have a unique id attribute i'm going to need to access that later and that's just because  you can't trust the vellum solver's op to keep your constraints ordered the next thing that i'm  going to do is create a shaped falloff um and what i want to do is basically have this falloff  sweep over the geometry from one side to the other uh and this is going to control the strength of  the pins so i'm going to start like maybe a second in to the animation and i am going to  let's see let's move it this way and then rotate it 90 degrees i'm going to turn on preview falloff  i want to scale it down and z so that the um contrast is a little higher and i think i actually  want this to be rotated negative 90 so now when i animate it it's going to sweep from one side to

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\mops-motion-operators-for-houdini-part-2\frame_043.jpg

### Inside Solver [149:54]
**Transcript:** the other so i'll start here and then keyframe translate and then over about a second  i'm going to sweep it across and i might even narrow this more you know maybe it can be a little  bit smaller than this so that the transition is a little bit more drastic  yeah so i'm going to have like this uh this area sweeping over and this is going to be used to  directly affect the constraint strength so the next thing i need to do is because constraint  properties are primitive attributes they're not point attributes i need to use attribute promote  to promote mobs falloff from a point attribute which is that which it always is by default to a  primitive attribute so i'm just going to grab mobs falloff here and now it's promoted to the  primitives um and finally what i'm going to do just to make my life a little bit easier is i'm going  to flag this with a null and just call this constraints  lastly i'm going to drop down the valence solver stop  she's right here and the geometry goes in the first input and the constraints go into the second  and it's already trying to simulate which is why it's staying a little bit of time and you can  see that uh starting out because these pins have a constraint weight of one nothing is  happening in simulation because those pins are are active from the start so what i want to do now  is go inside the valence solver and use this um  and use this falloff to directly modulate those constraint values so if i dive inside the valence  solver the way one of the ways anyways that you can quickly mess with constraint properties is using  the valence constraint properties stop uh and i'm just going to wire this into the forces tab  what i want to do is first i want to go to the inputs tab and this is important  i need to be able to read from that constraints null that i built um because that's where the attributes  are changing over time that's important so for input three i'm just going to change this to stop  and then i'm going to point it to that constraints null that i set so now i have this is input three  and this is necessary so that i can run a vex snippet on it so i have an address that i can reach  it at once that's done i'm going to go back to properties and if i if i run this function without  setting a group it's going to modulate every single constraint on the entire cloth object and  that's not what i want i only want to affect the pins because if i affect everything then this is  just going to turn into soup um so i'm going to set this to be the pin group and that's the group  that i set earlier in sops on these pins specifically uh and what i want to do is um adjust the stiffness  and so right now this is just set to one but what i can do is use a tiny little bit of vex  to adjust this after the fact so i'm going to turn on use vexpression  and then what i want to do is grab the original stiffness um of the uh the constraints moving in  so what i can do is just say float i'm just going to call this original stiffness is equal to the  primitive value of those source constraints so that's input to i'm going to get the stiffness attribute  which is whatever it was going in i think by default it's like one or point one it's something  pretty small and then the idea attribute and this is the idea attribute that i created on those  primitives um because this vellum constraint property top is running per primitive so i can use  this to address them the reason i can't use primnum is again because those values get scrambled in  this stop and you can't trust them next thing i'm going to do is grab the falloff attribute from  that those same constraint primitives so uh falloff is equal to prim2 the attribute name is mom's falloff  and i want to grab this again from the same matching primitive by id and now what i can do is i want  to output a stiffness value that's modulated by this falloff and so the the parameter name here is  stiffness if you hover over it that's how you know and so what i'm going to do is say stiffness  this is going to be the override is equal to that original stiffness that i defined so  or edge stiffness times falloff value that i computed  and now i'm going to jump back out and the last thing i want to do is just make sure that my shape falloff  values are sane because pins are really sensitive and i don't necessarily want any pins to be like  100% or the points are just going to snap back when the constraint rolls through them

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\mops-motion-operators-for-houdini-part-2\frame_044.jpg

### Final Simulation [154:34]
**Transcript:** so i'm going to go back to my shape falloff and just set the remap so that the maximum value of any  pin is 0.1 okay now that that's done what i can do is play back the simulation and initially oh i  need a ground plan i'm sorry let's go in here and think that's under  there we go ground position check that on  and so now initially the whole thing is going to collapse because there's no pins involved it's  just the cloth constraints that are holding it up but starting a second in as that falloff sweeps  across it's going to activate those pins and we could even use smaller values for the pin  constraint if we want the the rise back up to be a little bit more subtle we might need more  sub steps to really dial us in but you can see that it kind of springs back this way

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\mops-motion-operators-for-houdini-part-2\frame_045.jpg

### ID Attribute [155:27]
**Transcript:** i could even have this output max be even lower and see if this works better for  modulating those constraint primitives let's try that  yeah so there's a little bit more bounce the second time when working with this  and if you want to play with these physical settings again this is in the hip file  for this class it's under o5simulations.hip but you can see that it like you could use this falloff  value in similar expressions to modulate any part of a constraint that's you know that includes  stiffness but you could also do this to apply to rest length for example which is another really fun  one to play with you can get some really weird growing bulging effects from that but the the point  is to just you know mobs is creating attributes and everything in hudini is about attributes so  if it's easier for you to art direct these things using simple you know spread falloffs or shape  falloffs or whatever you've got to get the point attributes that you want you have them at your  disposal they're easy to loop they've built in noise so you can kind of just use these to drive  other parameters in simulations without having to think too hard.  okay the last section I want to go into is just a pretty quick one about common mistakes  with mobs easy places to get tripped up this will just take me one second to load the file i'm  going to create a new scene here so the first thing that i want to talk about is merging geometry  streams because this is a really common one that you'll run into where you merge two object  streams together and you don't understand why your stuff isn't working so really quickly i'm  going to make a box give it some vertex normals pipe it into an instance sir  actually you know what in the interest of time we don't really need to do this to describe it  so i'm just going to copy the setup really quick so that we can just go through it node by node  so here i have a box an instance there a sphere doing exactly the same thing i'm transforming this over  and now i'm merging these two areas together now i'm putting down a shape fall off  that is going across the entire length of this but you see that gap in the middle  the reason this is happening the reason this this can't work as is is because if we go to our point  attributes list and we look at follow and we look at our IDs the boxes here are starting zero to  24 but so are the spheres and most mobs operators are very sensitive to the ID attribute you need to  have a unique ID for everything going in or else you're going to get inconsistent behavior when you  set these things up so one way to get around this there's the number of different ways that you  can handle this is for example in this setup what i could do with these spheres is go to the sorting  tab and make sure that my id start number it leaves me enough room so that i don't overlap with  the box so i could either set this to you know a thousand and now you can see it works just fine  or if you want to be procedural about it i could say uh endpoints and then path to the mobs  instanceer and now that expression is going to evaluate to exactly 25 so now i'm starting at 25

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\mops-motion-operators-for-houdini-part-2\frame_046.jpg

### Sort Order [159:02]
**Transcript:** and so you can see that my IDs are going smoothly uh when i merge from zero to 25 and there's no overlaps  and now the rest of them just sort of tack on to there so that's an easy way to resolve this if you  know that you're going to have multiple mob streams that you need to merge together you can just make  sure that even going into them they have uh different values another way that you can get around  this if you don't want to set up that ID start number expression just delete this really quick and go  back is uh you still have mobs convert and you can run this impact primitives mode and so i can  just say packed primitives and then override the ID attribute and also override name um and now it's  going to automatically again take the point numbers regenerate a new ID attribute from that and then  also regenerate a new name attribute if it has to so that the name attributes also are all unique  the other way that you can get around this is like i could call the uh you know i could call upstream  i could call the mobs instance there i could give it a different name prefix so these are names  fear instead of just peace and then if i turn off override name here um now you can see that i'm  getting peace zero through 24 and then sphere zero through 24 so that's another way to keep these  things separate um the name attribute is mostly required for RBD simulations because if two  packed primitives have the same name they'll be solved as the same object um but a lot of mobs  nodes especially modifiers have um like if you look at apply attributes or anything that inherits  from it you can see that you have a match by tag here that you can switch from ID to name  there's some situations where you might want to use one over the other so you have both of those  options and that's why mobs convert gives you these uh options as well as the ability to to better  control packed RBD simulations um another similar problem that you'll run into occasionally  not as often is sort order um so if you're in a situation where you know you for whatever reason  you need to randomize the point order of something because it makes it easier for you to dial in  some random value later in in your in your your project really quickly i just have a poll here  i'm running them through an instance to get a grid of falls and then i'm randomizing my point  sort value but i'm not randomizing my primitive value so what happens what's happening now is that  there's a decynchronization between my point values like my point numbers and the packed primitives  that they represent because all of these things are done by you know a an ID value a name and mobs by  default assumes that your point order is the same as your primitive order so that if it wants to fetch  a packed transform for something on a point it knows that the point that you're referring to means  the same primitive number that you're referring to if you if you mess with that sort order mobs  all of a sudden has no idea what you're dealing with and so when i apply a shape fall if and then try  to transform even though the shape fall is linear it looks random because my sort order is wrong you  can see if i turn off this sort node these guys are moving in the right order so to get around this  you have two options one of them is to just not randomize your sort order and find another way around  it or resort your packed primitives and points after the fact to make sure that they're they're  working the right way or there's a infrequently used mobs node called mobs sort that does this for you  and you also have the ability to rebuild the ID attribute from the name if that's a better way to  to get it back otherwise what it's going to do is use the point number to regenerate a new  a new ID not a new ID but it's going to resort based on what it thinks is the right order in order to  keep your point and your primitive numbers consistent and so now you can see that with mobs sort in  place the transfer modifier works and you can go back to what you were doing another thing is like  if you're going to merge geometry streams in that aren't using mobs and i don't recommend that  you do that you need to make sure that you're doing that at the end of the network because let's say

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\mops-motion-operators-for-houdini-part-2\frame_047.jpg

### Packed Fragments [163:02]
**Transcript:** you have a bunch of loose points or like volumes or i don't people have much try to do some really  weird stuff and send me demophiles that don't work and it's because they're trying to mix and  match all of these different things and like splines in the same flow my advice is keep those things  separate but if you have to merge them together do it at the end of the chain after you're done  doing all of the mobs stuff another really common thing and i've alluded this already but i just  want to drive it home one more time is dealing with packed fragments and fall off preview really  quickly i'm just going to paste the network in here and it's the same sort of fracture setup that i've  done before where you have a test geometry i'm going to scatter points on it through Voron  a fracture and then mobs convert it so now i have a bunch of packed fragments if i run them up shapes  fall off on this you can see that the shape is covering the whole peg but the whole thing is equally  pink and this is just a built-in limitation of packed fragments the viewport cannot display unique  colors on them just because of how uh Houdini is optimizing packed fragments under the hood for display  and if you're curious packed fragments you can just look at the middle mouse menu and you'll know  that it's a packed fragment because it'll tell you there's slightly different from packed primitives  for optimization reasons but what you need to do in this case if if you can't get an accurate preview  is just turn on display of sprites and then just adjust the sprite scale to fit  you can even override the scale completely if you need to  and now you can actually get an accurate view of what this is doing you just want to make sure  that when you're done uh you turn off display of sprites or turn off preview fall off entirely because  you obviously don't want to render these sprites another little known thing is that if you have a  lot of fall off down the chain or like you don't know which fall off has this preview on it that's  messing things up there is a i'm going to turn preview fall off back on there is a little known  tool on the mobs shelf called disable fall off previews and what this is going to do is crawl your  entire stop chain looking for fall off nodes and disable all of them at the same time  so if you ever get to a point where like you have preview on and it's messing up your color downstream  and you don't know why this will just switch everything off all at once uh it's a good one day  to have in your back pocket in case you get lost uh because you can have a lot of different fall  off previews potentially enabled in a long network um it's going to jump out again and do another  I got two more of these and then we're done so another thing that I want to bring up is something  specific to who you need 19 and rigid body dynamics that has been uh kind of a pain when working  with mobs uh when you're doing dynamics work uh and I'll explain what I mean and just uh paste this in  again I don't want to waste anybody's time um so instant thing agrid same thing as always and then  randomizing so I have an orient attribute that's randomized if I take this as is and run it through  the bullet solver and this is something that those of you in 18 won't notice but in who do you  need 19 template point attributes like p-scale, orient, scale uh there's a few others that it  look consider on the first frame of simulation in who do you need 19 with with packed rbd specifically  who do you need is computing a rest transform based on where your points are at that point in time  from then on if you have any template point attributes defined on your points who do you need is  going to additively apply those to your transforms and you can see what I mean here with this randomized  um my scale value is point one eight and I have an orient attribute on my first frame of simulation  it's scaling everything down by another point one eight and it's rotating them again because of  that orient attribute and this is inescapable like who do you need is going to see these attributes and  just do it and so the way to get around this if you're working in who do you need 19 in any view  any version beyond that I assume unless side effects changes its behavior again is to put down  an attribute delete and delete orient delete p-scale delete scale any other related attributes and now

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\mops-motion-operators-for-houdini-part-2\frame_048.jpg

### Instance to Points [167:09]
**Transcript:** the first frame of our simulation matches what our randomized look like keep this in your back pocket  is anytime you're using mobs with rbd simulations you're going to have to do this every time  I'm hoping that there's eventually a way that I can find to help automate this  but for now you're going to want to do this before every uh every bullet sim  and the last thing that I want to bring up is something that I alluded to earlier with uh when I  was talking about the instance sir that's gonna really quick um I am going to  do again just paste a quick setup here because I don't really want to go into the details  so I have a dot network here and a lot of people want to use the op the the mobs instance sir  um to copy to particle streams so I have this particle stream that's just pushing points out  and then it's like a little bit of wind noise to make them swirl upwards um I have two  objects here this peghead and this rubber toy I'm match sizing them and then running them into an  instance sir now the instance sir is set to use it's in distribution type mesh it's pointing to  that template and then it's instancing to points so it's basically acting like a copy to points  uh by default this way so it's just copying to each of those template points if I scrub the  timeline you saw how many particles were in that original simulation right but now you're just  seeing a tiny handful coming up once and then disappearing this and this is something that trips  people up a lot the reason that this is happening is because by default uh mobs is assuming that you  want to be copying to like a deforming mesh potentially like something that is animating like a  crack you know a crag test geometry whatever um and so what it's doing is in order to save time and  also make the so the instanceing solution more consistent from point to point it's computing  um your it's computing sort of where the mesh is at at the given rest frame this template rest  frame attribute right here and then uh applying that uh it's sort of interpolating the mesh values  from frame to frame after that uh it's fast and it's smooth when it works but when your point count  is changing this method doesn't work and so anytime you're you're instancing to something that has a  changing point count you need to take this enable template interpolation for flag and turn it off  and right away now you're going to see that you're getting copies every single point  this is one of the most common bugs that i run into aside from people merging geometry streams and  wondering why things aren't working um if you're going to use the instanceer for this this is the  only way to do it the other thing that you can do is just use copy to points um again mobs isn't a  closed system there are places where you're going to want to use the instanceer and there's the  places where you might want to use copy to points they're both great for the specific things that they  do um but you're not locked to using mobs nodes in order to use mobs you can kind of mix and match  as much as you want as long as you've got an it attribute um and that's it for this one uh i hope  that this wasn't uh too overkill for everybody involved but um i just wanted to get through as much  this system as i possibly could before we start talking about math next week

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\mops-motion-operators-for-houdini-part-2\frame_049.jpg


---

## Structured Notes

### Core Technique
[PENDING EXTRACTION]

### Summary
[PENDING EXTRACTION]

### Key Steps
[PENDING EXTRACTION]

### Houdini Nodes / VEX / Settings
[PENDING EXTRACTION]

### Difficulty
[PENDING EXTRACTION]

### Houdini Version
[PENDING EXTRACTION]

### Tags
[PENDING EXTRACTION]

---

## Related Tutorials
[PENDING EXTRACTION]
