---
title: MOPs: Motion Operators for Houdini Part 1
source: YouTube
url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=g9eSle9IVjU
author: Houdini.School
ingested: 2026-06-23
houdini_version: "[PENDING]"
tags: []
extraction_status: pending
frames_dir: tutorials/frames/mops-motion-operators-for-houdini-part-1/
frame_count: 51
---

# MOPs: Motion Operators for Houdini Part 1

**Source:** [YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=g9eSle9IVjU)
**Author:** Houdini.School
**Duration:** 165m31s | 51 section(s)

---

## Raw Data (for Claude Code extraction)


### Teacher and Course [0:00]
**Transcript:** So you guys probably know this, but I'm Henry. I go by Toad Storm on the internet.  I have been a visual effects guy in film and commercials for, I don't know, something like 15 years now.  And I am the developer of mobs.  That's all I got right now, really. I live in San Jose with a bunch of cats in my wife.  Let's get started. So before we go into anything else, I just want to do a quick boring PowerPoint presentation on sort of conceptually what mobs is about.  And then we'll go into installing it because I imagine some of you probably had trouble with it.  And so I just want to go for the installation process with everybody before we go any further.  So let's get to the PowerPoint.  I'm going to share my screen and please let me know if something isn't working.

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\mops-motion-operators-for-houdini-part-1\frame_000.jpg

### MOPs Introduction PowerPoint [0:53]
**Transcript:** Okay, mobs 101.  So just to get started mobs is a free and open source toolkit for motion design and animation and it's built to take complex mathematical operations like translations, rotations, pivot adjustment, scaling, things that are honestly mathematically kind of tricky and abstract them into simple systems that you can animate just  and then you can start with a couple of key frames.  This should be playing a video and I really apologize for that. There we go.  That course system can be used to create all kinds of complex behaviors from just a few conceptually simple nodes.  Mobs also includes several higher level tools to help solve common motion design problems such as adjusting the timing of instance animations or moving objects along a path.  Things that most people know how to do and who Dini, but they can be kind of painful setup.  And the other kind of no Dini interchangeably with sops since everything mobs is doing rights back to common attributes that are used everywhere else in Dini.  And this isn't playing because PowerPoint hates me, but this is one that you've probably seen from Paul as the best who also teaches here.  So behind most of the higher level tools and mobs is to enable something that I call gestural animation.  So it's using a few simple controls with minimal key frames to get complex results so you just have less things that you need to dial in with traditional methods of animation.  If you were trying to animate something like this, you'd be spending all day setting key frames and then you would never be able to adjust them.  And you know, that's just for the first version approaching this procedurally can get your results way quicker and thankfully who need to excel is that approach.  Mobs is it sort of acts as an extra UX layer on top of what who Dini is already doing under the hood.  So it takes advantage of the really powerful architecture that who Dini already gives you and then just makes the some of these common motion graphics tasks a little bit more accessible.  In the first lesson, we're going to go over the basics of the system and then we're going to show how some of the more straightforward nodes and mobs work later on.  We'll talk about some of the more complex nodes in mobs that take a little bit more thinking to use or they're just like not quite as straightforward to work with.  And then in the third lesson, we're going to talk about all the scary math that mobs relies on and also all of computer graphics relies on so a lot of terrifying things like trigonometry and linear algebra.  And then we're going to just real quick before I go in anything else after this lesson if you want to learn more about mobs like where to look for help offline.  There's a few different places where you can get information.  The first place is the mobs wiki and this is on GitHub where you would get the rest of where you actually download mobs.  The wiki has notes on every single node within mobs and it also has links to example files.  So it's a good place to check if you just need an overall survey of what different nodes do.  So it's a basic tutorial to just sort of understand how the system works.  It's also a discord server which I highly recommend.  I'm on discord all the time and there's a lot of other people here in different time zones who were pretty experienced with mobs who are happy to answer questions.  So if you get stuck and you need help fast, it's a really good place to look.  Mobs Twitter is usually where I announce updates first. There's also a mobs Facebook group that I'll link to next, but Twitter is just a little bit easier to post to.  So anytime there's a new release or anything new in mobs world, this is the first place that I'll post it.  There's also a forum that isn't just widely used, but the advantage it has over discord is that everything is logged.  So you can search here for answers to common questions, but discord is probably going to get you answers faster. It's just more traffic.  And now that the boring slideshow is done, we can actually start making cool stuff.  Let me just open up my other Hittini.  Okay.

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\mops-motion-operators-for-houdini-part-1\frame_001.jpg

### File Install [4:36]
**Transcript:** So the first thing that I want to talk about is sort of and sorry if you haven't already downloaded this if you go to the class link, there is a file that I posted there called 101.zip.  And it has all of the files that I'm going to be working with.  The first one that I'm looking at right now is called zero one attributes and intrinsics.  Oh, you know what I skipped.  I skipped the installation step. I'm sorry.  First time.  So what I want to do now is go over the installation process for anybody who's been stuck and then show you how to quickly update because it's something that you'll be doing often.  I tend to update the software pretty regularly.  Let me just bring the browser over here.  If you're not already familiar with GitHub, it's not the most accessible place.  If you are familiar with GitHub, then I assume that you already know how to like clone a repo and I'm not going to bore you with the details.  But if you need to download mobs manually, if this is your first time installing it and you don't know how to use get the place that you would go.  I mean, obviously you go to get hub.com slash toadstombs.  And in the corner here, you're going to see a releases page and the latest release is always going to be right here.  If you just click on the releases page, you can see a list of all the different releases that have gone through.  I cycle between stable builds and experimental builds, depending on what kinds of things I'm tweaking.  What you'll want to do is is on mobs 171 stable.  You'll go to the source code zip here and just download that.  So just put that wherever.  Next, what you're going to want to do is pick a location that you want to install mobs to.  And this is kind of arbitrary.  It doesn't really matter where you decide to put it, although I highly recommend not putting it inside your documents folder where the document slash who do you need 19.  And you're your who do you home folder.  Don't put it there and don't put it inside a who do the installation.  You'll regret it.  But what I recommend doing is just picking an arbitrary folder somewhere on your system where your other plugins might live.  For me, I put it in.  Project VFX and then I have this mobs directory.  And all you need to do is just extract that zip to this location and then remember where this director is because this next part becomes important.  The next step beyond this. And again, all of this is documented in the mobs wiki, but I just want to go over it here first for all of you.  And I'm going to go over to the windows on OS 10, the or Linux, the exact directories you use are different.  I hope you know what they are because I can't necessarily tell you on a windows machine.  But what you'll do is.  Open up your documents or preferences directory where the Houdini preferences folder is right.  So in windows, it's a document slash Houdini and then the version that you're using.  And within that, you may or may not find a packages directory.  If you've never used a Houdini package before, you won't see this directory. It doesn't come by default.  So you'll have to make it create a new folder and make sure it's named exactly this packages.  When you boot Houdini, if it finds a packages directory in any of the scanned paths that it's set to look for packages in.  And that's dependent on your system environment.  And then you can see the version number directory where all of the rest of these preferences are stored by default.  This is the first package directory to be scanned.  You can add others if you know how to configure the environment, but I don't want to go into that here.  So make the folder if it doesn't exist.  And then open it up in the mobs installation, you're going to see a mobs.json.  And the JSON file is the package.  And Houdini, it's basically a sort of shortcut way to configure your system environment on Houdini launch so that it's setting.  Keys that say this is where to scan for OTLs, this is where to scan for Python scripts. This is, you know, and so on.

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\mops-motion-operators-for-houdini-part-1\frame_002.jpg

### Edit File [8:30]
**Transcript:** So if you edit this file in a text editor.  Let's take a second.  You're going to see a couple of things.  You're going to see.  Mobs here as an environment key.  And then you're going to see a couple of the things at the bottom. This like path thing here.  This is what actually sets the environment like path in a Houdini package.  This is a little confusing.  Sets the Houdini path environment variable, which tells who do you need where to look for tools.  So.  How do I do that?  Sorry, I might be able to, oh yeah, there we go. No, I can do it.  This is the only thing that you need to change up here.  And you just need to set this to be the exact path where you copied mobs to.  So on this, I have it in D projects VFX mobs.  So I would just copy this path.  Paste it here.  And the only thing that you need to make sure of when you do this is on if you're on a Windows machine.  Windows likes these backslashes for path instead of forward slash.  And this gets everyone.  All you got to do is change these to forward slash.  And this is like a long running irritation with Windows, but they use backslashes to separate file folders.  And backslashes are escape characters in most programming languages.  And most of the time when you're writing a text-based parser, it's.  It basically looks at those backslashes and thinks that you mean something very, very different.  So make sure if you're on Windows, you change these to forward slash.  And then save this JSON file and then copy it.  Into your packages directory.  And then you already got mine here configured.  And let me just show you the one that I've already pre-configured.  And it's already set to D projects VFX mobs.  That same exact path using forward slash.  Once that's saved and in your Houdini directory, if you boot up Houdini.  You should see up at the top here.  If you don't see these mobs shells, you can go to the tool shelf here.  Your shelf sets.  Sorry, not your shelf sets the sorry this plus button right here.  This should see a mobs shelf.  If you see it, the installation is good.  You're ready to go.  It is also possible to install mobs directly editing the Houdini.n file, but I don't recommend doing that.  It's kind of the old school way of doing things.  And especially if you're using a build of Houdini 18 five or later.  I think they've solved most of the issues that were happening on packages in previous versions.  So stick with packages if you can.  It's way easier to deal with.  So it's a good idea to do that.  It's a good idea to do that.  That means that if for whatever reason you need to disable mobs for a certain project,  you don't have to go in and start performing surgery on your Houdini end.  To make that happen, you just move that Jason file somewhere else to just to disable the package and you're good to go.  The last thing that I want to go over is once you have mobs installed,  let's say you have an older version, because I'm using 171.  I just released it like maybe two days ago.  The next date is again, if you're a big nerd and you know how get works,  you can just use get pull and you're good.  Otherwise, if you go to mobs here, the shelf, and you see this thing with an arrow on it called mobs updater.  If you click this, it's going to connect to GitHub and automatically give you both the stable and experimental branch.  You're going to want to grab the stable branch for this one because 171 is the most recent,  is the most recent release and it's stable.  And then you can select 171 from the drop down and then just hit apply update.  Once that's done, it's going to think for a second because that's the pull the package from GitHub,  unzip it, copy it to where your previous mobs install was.  It's essentially going to overwrite the installation in place and then restart Houdini and you should have 171.  Before I continue, does anybody need time to update?  Does anyone not have mobs installed in need help?  I just don't want to go into the actual tutorial until we've got all that cleared.

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\mops-motion-operators-for-houdini-part-1\frame_003.jpg

### Q&A: Different Versions [12:31]
**Transcript:** You can.  I will say that there's some bug fixes that have gone into 171 that you might notice slightly different behaviors uncertain nodes if you don't have the most recent one,  but we're only going over pre-basic concepts in this one.  So if you see different results in what you're doing from what you're seeing on my screen,  it might be because of a version version mismatch, but it's not going to the overall core concepts of mobs haven't changed.  So you can still follow along.  It's just possible you might see different results from me. That's all.

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\mops-motion-operators-for-houdini-part-1\frame_004.jpg

### Q&A: Older Version [13:11]
**Transcript:** Yeah, okay, so that's a Python 2 to Python 3 translation error, which hopefully we're not going to see too often anymore.  Now that Python 2 has been cycled out, if you see that, it means you're going to have to just download and overwrite your existing install manually.  Okay, the last thing that you're going to want to download is if you haven't already gotten it, go to the Houdini school link for this class and grab the 101.zip file.  And then open up the first file, which is called 01 attributes and intrinsic.hip.  You don't have to necessarily download this, but it's going to just make it easier because this is just a demo file that's meant to explain how template point attributes and intrinsics are linked.  So there's a bunch of vex in here that you're not going to want to really type in yourself.

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\mops-motion-operators-for-houdini-part-1\frame_005.jpg

### Intrinsics [14:15]
**Transcript:** So I'm going to bring that instance over here.  And we're going to get started.  So under the hood, Houdini uses specific attributes to describe where to copy things.  And then there's attributes all over the place as a way of being able to customize what's going to happen on any given point or primitive and most of you guys probably already know that template point attributes are special in that both for the copy to point stop and for point instant seeing and for a lot of other things that involve copying the Dini.  So specific attributes that the copy to point stop and the instance object to work with that describe where things go in space and a huge chunk of mobs is about manipulating the transforms of objects so like where they are in space.  The problem with the system and it's it's just sort of it's an evolving thing so there's always going to be glitches in it is that template point attributes are one side of this, you know, like things like p scale and up orient all of these things that you've probably worked with before when you're trying to figure out how to orient and position copies.  But with packed primitives, which are essentially instances there's a second layer to this and that layer is intrinsic transforms so intrinsic attributes are sort of these hidden attributes that you may or may not be too familiar with.  And there's a lot of them they're all over who Dini and if I can show you right now if we just if you open up the attributes and intrinsic object here and just it's should the display flag should be on this copy to points so we just have this simple grid of pickheads here.  If you go to the primitives tab and you look at this thing that says intrinsic so you can see I don't have any printed primitive attributes on any of these.  If I open this up though there's a bunch of sort of semi hidden attributes here is that who Dini adds for you.  You don't have control over really generating these things they're just there.  And they mean a lot of different things you have bounds in this describes like the actual min and max spouting boxes of each one of these.  You have geometry ID which is just sort of like where you know sort of a hash of where this object came from you can see they're all the same because they're technically pointing towards the same peghead.  And then the important one at least for what we're doing right here is the transform intrinsic and without going into the math yet this is a matrix that describes the position orientation and scale of each copy.  So actually sorry this is a this is just the orientation and scale I'll explain the difference later.

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\mops-motion-operators-for-houdini-part-1\frame_006.jpg

### Intrinsics Questions [17:01]
**Transcript:** These intrinsics are here regardless if it's packed or is this come when it's packed like do you get the intrinsics only when it's packed or so.  And transform intrinsic specifically you only get from packed primitives.  But there are a lot of intrinsics in who do you need to mean different things for example if I were to just drop down like a line stop.  And then you know says a simple polyline and then go to intrinsic tab you can see that it generates this thing called closed and this tells me whether this polyline primitive is a closed primitive or not if I were to make a circle.  And do the same thing and look at that intrinsic it says one because this is a closed surface is actually drawing a fill.  If I were to use the end stop.  To unroll it so like we can do unroll the shared points to turn it into a curve now zero.  So some of these things who genius just doing for you under the hood a lot of these attributes are read only you can only.  Read them in like in your own stop networks to sort of say like maybe you're writing an operator that needs to write to run on closed curves differently than runs and open curves.  You could read this attribute and use that to you know change the logic of what you're doing under the hood.  Some attributes some of these intrinsics you can write to it's not consistent which ones you can and can't.  But the transform intrinsic is one that you can write to and this is sort of a central part of what mobs does is it tries to unify this template point attribute world with the primitive intrinsic world so that you can kind of use the two interchangeably and modify them after the fact in a way that's a little less painful because normally intrinsic can only be modified using facts.  I see and then why does he need hide the intrinsic or make it less obvious for you to find.  I'm not overwhelming.  Yeah I think that's a good chunk of it is to just you know you wouldn't necessarily want to see a four by four transform matrix attributes so like 16 columns in your spreadsheet on every instance geometry that you've got it all times it's not necessarily.  You know something that most artists want to care about so they kind of tuck it away and because a lot of these attributes are read only that's another big reason why you would want to hide them is because they would just clog up the spreadsheet otherwise.

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\mops-motion-operators-for-houdini-part-1\frame_007.jpg

### Q&A: VEX Explanation [19:20]
**Transcript:** Okay so with template point attributes and hopefully most of your familiar with these things like orient wrote ROT scale p scale and p technically is a template point attribute when you're copying the things.  They are telling you need how to copy things so I have a grid here that I'm going to instance to and in this example what I've done here is I've set up sort of a switch here that let's set this to zero.  And you can see that all the pay heads of the same scale the pointing the same direction and their copy each point of the grid.  So go ahead and click on this wrangle here and look at this vex I realize it's a lot of it but what this is describing is sort of what the defaults are like what are the temper point attributes in the default state when you're just copying to something.  So I have the an attribute set to positive Z and this is how who do you understand instances to work like when you're copying something to points it expects that your object is going to be facing forward towards positive Z and it's up access so what determines where the top faces is positive why.  And this is consistent across who teeny like it's just sort of expecting that that's how your geometry to instance is going to be aligned.  Scale is a vector in XYZ and it just assumes by default that everything is scale one and then p scale sort of a multiplier on top of that so you can use both simultaneously and they'll multiply against each other.  And an up are how most people like to think about orientation if they're not thinking about it in oil or angles because it's just conceptually not that hard to see, for example, real quick, if I go to these template points and I use a mobs visualize frame, this is a way of visualizing orientations on points.  And it does not work in in who dd 19 just yet, but if you double click to go inside, you can see the visualizer.  And so you can see that every one of these points has why the green axis facing up and blue the forward axis pointing forward is also a red axis that's pointing towards the side, which you don't really need to worry about yet yet i'll explain more about what this all means in the third part when we start talking about math.  But and enough basically means this you have a forward and an up axis if I go back to the attribute wrangle here there are other kinds of attributes that copy to points and instance in who dd will work with as well, you have orient, which is a court turnian.  Don't bother trying to understand what that actually means these numbers it's crazy like wizard math that most people myself included don't really have an intuitive understanding of because it involves imaginary numbers.  The only thing that you should know about this is that zero zero zero one is default and it just means like the same transform we already looked at Z is facing forward why is facing up.  The cool thing about quaternians is that they interpolate very easily and accumulate easily so you can multiply them together to accumulate rotations and a lot of computer graphics, especially in game engines use quaternians under the hood to define orientations because they blend really, really well you're never going to get gimbal lock or flipping with them.  You also have rot which is sort of like an extra rotation on top of the orientation.  You have transform which you'll see more often when you're using kin effects and this is another yet yet another template attribute that you could optionally use which describes essentially the same thing is the transform intrinsic.  On packed primitives it's a three by three matrix that describes orientation and scale and space and then you have pivot which just describes an offset in local space for each of these objects.  From the center of the object.  So I know this is a lot but this is sort of like a real brief survey of what all of these things do.

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\mops-motion-operators-for-houdini-part-1\frame_008.jpg

### Transform Modifier [23:19]
**Transcript:** If you toggle the switch here and then go to adjust template attributes what I've done here is built a very quick little thing that allows you to sort of set what these attributes are using channels so go ahead and put your display flag and copy to points and then you can kind of play with these values.  This is what you would be setting using other who do you need stops under the hood but you can see that it's it's not very user friendly like for example if I drag down scale that's an obvious one and I can just sort of set this and scale is sort of easy to understand but when you're dealing with things like up.  You know like if I want these things to be facing the side I if I turn this to one like you know now they're kind of facing diagonally out you know I can try and take this down but oh no sorry.  This one but and like yeah now that I have the up vector facing towards positive X you can see they're all leaning towards the side but this is not fun to work with this is kind of a pain to set these things and that's why you have tools like in similar for do you have a graph or in most 3d software you have sort of an abstracted layer on top of this where you can start talking about things in terms of.  Oil or transforms you know rotate 90 degrees on this axis rotate 90 degrees on this axis because it's just easier to think that way but who do you need under the hood wants to see things in these vector attributes so this I'm I'm rambling a bit here but this is important in that who do you kind of expect you to be setting these attributes in a way that computers like to see and not necessarily the way that you want to see it.  So let's jump out of this one and then just in this other object network here Mops setting both.  Here I just want to really quickly go over sort of what Mops is thinking about under the hood so again I've got this pig head and then I've got a grid here and let's go to this copy to points so.  So Mops transform here is basically it's very similar to the transform stop but instead of working on your entire geometry stream as a single object it works on each one of those points independently so for example if I were to transform this grid and you know this is obvious but if I transform this grid and do let's say a 90 degree 45 degree rotation along why.  The whole thing rotates 45 degrees Mops doesn't think that way at least not by default what it's going to do instead is.  Nothing at least when you look at the grid by itself you're not going to see anything you can see that the orient attribute has changed if you've got your spreadsheet open and just as an aside I recommend having your spreadsheet open all the time like never close it it's the most important thing and you do need it's almost more important than the view port like.  Have the spreadsheet open it will save you so much grief just being able to sanity check these numbers when you're when you're trying to troubleshoot things.  And let's go down to copy to points here so now you can see that each of these guys individually is rotated 45 degrees and this is what Mops is doing is it is sort of individually adjusting the template attributes on each one of these points that you're copying to so I'm going to set this back to zero.  And let's just put the display flag on step one now so what Mops is doing is it's literally setting the orient attribute on these things and then when you run copy to points that orient attribute is used to orient each one of the copies that that's generated by the copy to points up.  You probably already know how that works like it's one of the first things you learn when you're dealing with Houdini.  But what Mops also does is in an attempt to unify the packed transform thing and the template point thing I can drop another Mops transform after the fact here after the copy to points so I already have template point attributes here and just as this you know if I were to try to edit like the orient attribute or N or up after these primitives are already copied it wouldn't do anything because who deenies like well you already made these copies I'm not changing it again.  Mops will set both so it's going to modify both the template attributes that you see here and it's going to modify the transform and transics that you see here so if I go over to the primitive you and again i'm going to open up the transics list and I'm going to turn on transform because this is the one that I care about most for for Mops stuff right now.  By default if everything is facing you know the default orientation it's going to look like this so 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 1 and without getting too Matthew about this yet because we're a little early what this is basically saying is 1 0 0 means x faces x 0 1 0 means y faces y and 0 0 1 means Z faces Z so like everything is as it is supposed to be.  That aside go back to this month's transfer modifier and now try rotating this and you'll see that each one of these copies even though we're modifying this after these points have already been copied what Mops is doing is setting these intrinsic transforms based on the parameters that we set so if I rotate 45 degrees you can see that I get these very different numbers here.  And each one of these copies is rotating in turn what it's also doing at the same time is it still sets these these template point attributes at the same time so it's trying to unify these two things together so that later on if you need to do another operation to these transforms or if you need to use these points to maybe swap out the pig heads for something else you have these attributes ready to go under the hood and you can just continue to use them along with the rest of who dean interchangeably.

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\mops-motion-operators-for-houdini-part-1\frame_009.jpg

### Randomize [28:51]
**Transcript:** So that's a big part of this is like Mops is going to let you in either one of these settings you can either go about the traditional copy to points method where you modify your template point attributes and then at the end of the chain you copy and now all of your things for instance or you can manipulate them earlier or you can do both it doesn't matter like Mops will let you do both of these things.  So to further drive this home let's go here to step two.  Now what I've done here is I've run used a Mops randomize.  And I just have randomized orientation set so all of these things are pointing in random directions.  If I click on reset template attributes here this is active right now what this is doing is setting orient scale and pivot to be defaults what they're supposed to be and you can see that who didn't he doesn't care.  I've reset orient but the intrinsic transforms are already set so setting the manually back with an attribute rangle is going to do nothing because the points are already copied this operation doesn't modify the intrinsics.  But with Mops if I go to step three here if I then take that.  So these attributes are all still live I have orient scale and pivot all set to their defaults if I use Mops to basically set these attributes to take these and apply them to the intrinsics and that's what apply attributes does and we'll go into detail on this later now everything is facing forward.  So Mops again there's a lot of different ways that you can use it but what's going to do is take those template attributes the one that that you're going to be more used to working with and the ones that you can set using.  Koudini or the rest of mops you know how you can mix and match however you like mops will take those values and apply them back to the intrinsics after the fact.  So let's again go to step four.  And so what I'm doing here is I have a mops randomized set on these same pickheads and you can see that they're randomly scaled and they're randomly oriented again just you know messing things up.  These template point attributes that it's setting so if I click on this you can see I've got orient and I've got a randomized scale vector on each of these things.  Now i'm taking a rubber toy here and just you know running match size on it to center it and i'm copying it to the same points as those pickheads.  There and you can see that they have exactly the same you know let's go do it before after here here's the pickheads here's the rubber toys they have the same transforms so again i'm just trying as hard as I can to drill a point home that what it's doing is unifying these two approaches.  So you have points with template point attributes that you have packed transforms and you can change them before after in the middle however you want.  And then just apply those back to the pack transforms and mops will just sort of take care of it for you under the hood.

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\mops-motion-operators-for-houdini-part-1\frame_010.jpg

### Q&A: Transform Intrinsics Explained [31:39]
**Transcript:** So basically you can apply mops you can change the point attributes at any point downstream and it will go upstream and tweak the template attributes to modify them.  It's not technically going upstream but what it's doing is sort of setting both so when a packed primitive is already generated when it's copied that transform and trinzic is the only thing that matters that's what tells you dini how this thing is positioned in oriented space.  How do you do that after the copy to points like you've already set your copy points and everything is copied and then afterwards you're able to still manipulate it.  Yes it does that by literally by setting the transform in trinzic and that's the annoying part that you would not necessarily want to do as much by hand.  If you want to see it for example i've got this thing that's like setting the orient attribute here and it doesn't apply until I run mops apply attributes right.  If I go back to this step two here and go to this I can take this orient attribute and use it to reset these transforms but the way that you have to do it is a little bit ugly what i'm going to do is say i'm going to make a three dimensional matrix just call it m and set it to be.  Let's see you can i'm going to convert this.  This orient attribute into a three by three matrix and then i'm going to say set primit trinzic and there are slightly simplified functions that you can do with this to but i'm using set primit trinzic under the hood and mops and then I can say okay set the transform and trinzic for each point number to be equal to m.  And now it's going to lock that in place, but you can imagine that if you have to do this every time you just want to transform stuff after you've copied it it's going to get really annoying and mops is meant to save you from that irritation.  So that's really interesting so you're allowed to still manipulate afterwards with the trinzic i see.  Yeah, so and again like the intrinsic source of semi hidden from you and not all of the attributes are easy to understand and like you have to start dealing with you know even dealing with matrices for people who aren't used to them can be kind of it's just not intuitive to work with.  So you can and not every intrinsic can be set the transforms can know this is something that comes up a lot when you're trying to manipulate things is like there's sort of two.  Approaches you can take one you know and what who do you expect you to do generally speaking what they want you to do.  Is set all of these attributes up early in your flow and then copy at the end right is it just assumes like by the time you get to the copy operation all your template points are set up in your good to go right.  And in a lot of cases that works but it can still be kind of tricky to set those attributes you know for example just doing the classic like 90 degree rotation on one axis on your template points or like rotating along local axes like.  That can be really tricky to do on those points when all you have are things like end and up and it's.  Sorry to derail no it's okay.  Mops is just allowing you to think both ways so if it's easier for you to think one way and to set all that stuff up in advance you can do it that way just by set using mobs transform before you get to the copy operation or you can manipulate them afterwards it's entirely up to you.  There's like a slight performance difference but it's not necessarily one is better than the other it really depends on your network and what nodes in your network or time dependent on what aren't so like I can't tell you that one way is necessarily better than the other it's really just like how do you prefer to work and exactly how is your network setup.

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\mops-motion-operators-for-houdini-part-1\frame_011.jpg

### Q&A: Interface Question [35:19]
**Transcript:** Yeah, the idea is to just allow you to sort of think both ways about it and also to give you an interface to be able to easily set those attributes so that you don't have to think so hard about how you're rotating them.

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\mops-motion-operators-for-houdini-part-1\frame_012.jpg

### Copy to Points [35:53]
**Transcript:** Okay, so.  From here on out because we're not going to be writing nearly as much Vex now i'm just going to.  Drop all these building blocks with you so just give me one seconds.  Okay, so mobs is sort of roughly divided into four different parts and real quick i'm just going to drop down a geometry container and dive inside so if you open the mobs if you open the tab and you would look at mobs it's broken into these four parts you have fall off and i'll get to these later but these are similar to cinema for defaults where it's it gives you the ability to sort of.  Change how much something is affected by an operation you've generators which are actually making geometry or in some cases modifying geometry but in a way that is not what you would typically think of as a modifier it's not like adjusting transforms of things.  You've modifiers which are things that are basically changing the position orientation or scale of things in space and then you have tools which are a number of sort of miscellaneous things that don't neatly fit into these other categories or.  They are low level API notes that are sort of the building blocks of mobs that you can use either for simple operations or to build your own mobs notes later out of parts.  And we'll go into some more of these later as there are some useful ones that you'll use all the time and there's some that are a little bit more esoteric.  But we're going to start with his generators so how do you make stuff.  And so I am just going to call this instance or because this is going to be the first thing we go into is the mobs instance or.  The mobs instance or is sort of like a copy to points stop but with a sort of very different interface for how you would wire in inputs and distribute things.  And just as a caveat the instance or was written in Houdini 16.5 and a lot of things have changed about copy to points since then.  The way that you can use attributes to describe what what object the variant attribute or the piece attribute that copy to points supports now didn't exist back then.  And a number of other things about copy to points sort of were different back then where if you wanted to vary what was being copied to each point you had to create this really complicated for each loop and it was a nightmare to work with.  Copy to points has changed a lot of that since then the reason I'm saying this is that while the mobs instance are is great and it can do a lot and it you'll see that it's fairly simple to work with.  It is not the only way to work with mobs.  You don't have to use the instance or to use the rest of mobs you can use copy to points interchangeably with the rest of it.  Just want to drill at point home as much as I can that mobs is not a self contained system it will interface directly with the rest of Houdini in most cases.  So that aside.  Drop down a mobs instance there.  And then before we go anywhere else I'm just going to grab my trusty pig head I'll just run it through a match size so that I can get it centered and scaled the fit so it's taking up unit square.  And then I'm going to drag this over to the mobs instance.  We put the display flag on what you'll see by default is just sort of like a five by five cube.  The main interface here is broken out into three points you have the instance in part which is basically deciding what's getting copied where.  Or like what what are your copies what do they actually mean then you have your distribution tab which is sort of describing the points in space essentially like by default here we're creating.  So I'm going to create a grid.  And then the sorting tab is a couple of small things to basically say like what do we want these things to be named do we want to give them a name and ID a start number all that stuff and like what order do we want them to be sorted in that's all.  So starting from the instance tab and again I'm going to I don't know how my spreadsheet here disappeared but I'm going to reopen it.  I have a layout here that just has a spreadsheet good to go because I use it all the time always have the spreadsheet open I can't emphasize that enough.  So with the instance or when you wire something in you see you can see it's got this multi input here and the instance or is automatically going to take whatever you wired in and copy it to those points.  If I get something else for example I can take a do a rubber toy and then we'll just run it through this same match size up.  And then wire it in this is a multi inputs you can wire as much stuff in here you know I think it's like up to nine hundred ninety nine inputs.  Now you can see that some of these things by default have automatically been switched over rubber toys I'm going to go to the instance are here and then under the instance thing tab if you go to global transform.  I'm just going to turn uniform scale down so these copies separate a little bit so you have it's this sort of global transform that you can apply to all of your inputs at once is going to be handy if your stuff is is scaled in a different way than the distribution allows for or if you need to like just quickly offset everything at once.

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\mops-motion-operators-for-houdini-part-1\frame_013.jpg

### Patterns [40:52]
**Transcript:** And now if I zoom in you can see that it's just randomly taking these inputs and copying them to different points of the grid that's selected in our distribution method.  You can also load in files so for example if I drop down a file stop I just have default that BGO I can drag this in and it's automatically going to plot that into you can do the same thing with a limbics you can do the same thing with packed disc sequences just drop it in and the instance or put it there and then by default it's going to randomly select whatever you want to play there.  So if I go to the distribution tab I can set the type you know there's grid there's a linear option which is going to put them in a straight line and you can decide like how many points do I want in this how long do I want this to be it's basically a line stop under the hood.  You can also decide start end so you can just give it two points in space and it'll draw it between them.  You have a you know there's a spherical options you can just instance onto an automatic sphere that will align them to so.  Real simple there you have radial options you can instance in the ring it's just like a lot of simple patterns that you can quickly insist to if you don't want to use a copy of points.  I'm going to switch it back to the default grid you can also and i'll go into this later but you can instance to template meshes as well and it gives you some sort of helpful stuff to it like automatically make those copies stick to animated meshes you don't have to do complicated setups to make that work.

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\mops-motion-operators-for-houdini-part-1\frame_014.jpg

### Meshes on Animation [42:18]
**Transcript:** That's the basics of how the instance or works let's just do another quick setup here i'm going to drop down another pickhead and another instance or.  Just wire this up as the only input and now i'm going to grab a crack because I want to get like a geometry that I want to copy these things on to.  And then if you look at crag if you middle mouse on them you're going to see that he's packed.  And I don't want that I need regular geometry because I can't scatter on packed geometry because it who do you effectively isn't seeing it as being actual geometry when something is packed.  It's less accessible in a lot of ways it's the whole geometry is represented at a single point and so we should try to run the scatters up on that who is going to get really confused so i'm going to run drop an unpack stop.  And now you can see here middle mouse i've got 67 geometries and that's one for each sort of part of crag when i unpack now i've got polygons so about 90,000 polygons and this is what i'm going to scatter on to.  So i'm just going to drop down a null on this guy to have it i'm going to call this template.  And now let's go back to the mobs instance sir.  And in the distribution mode first let's go to the global transform scale these guys down.  Just to make it a little bit easier because crag is not very big and then on distribution i'm going to go to mesh and it's going to disappear because I don't have anything wired in yet but i'm going to do is just take this template and drag it into the.  template object up here and now you can see I got a bunch of pig heads glued to crag.  With the mobs instance there and this is one of the nice things that it does for you if you're instant sing to animated geometry mobs by default is going to try and interpolate the attributes of the template so that the instances stick to the surface so if you've ever tried using a scatter stop on animated geometry you'll probably notice that your points will just randomly dance around.  The orientation will change the positions will change it won't really match from frame to frame mobs is automatically and you can see that there's this check check box here called the  the orientation will change, the positions will change,  it won't really match from frame to frame.  Mops is automatically, and you can see  that there's this checkbox here called  Enable Template Interpolation.  Mops is automatically going to interpolate  so that positioning and orientation is stable  from one to the next.  So you can see that I've got this  horrific, massive pig heads that are glued, dude,  crag here, but they're all going to sort of stay  in their same relative positions frame to frame  and inherit their orientation from the base model.  And you have a lot of other options.

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\mops-motion-operators-for-houdini-part-1\frame_015.jpg

### Mesh Orientation [44:57]
**Transcript:** You don't necessarily have to scatter on a mesh.  I could instance on to every point of crag,  although this is going to take a second.  That's going to be, yeah, you can see,  I don't even have enough VRAM to show all these instances  it wants.  We'll go back to that.  But you have other options for how you want  to distribute on a mesh.  And there's similar settings, for instance,  into curves, other objects.  You also have your scatter settings here  so you can change how many pig heads do I want scatter  on this thing?  You can all of the things that you would expect from a scatter  set up, like, do I want to use a density attribute?  Do I want to relax the instances?  All of that stuff is essentially the same stuff under the hood.  It's a scatter stop.  But it's just sort of trying to smooth over some  of the more annoying parts of this setup for you.  In most cases on the instance there,  you also have the ability to sort of reorient the mesh  or like, facet it or do other quick mesh operations  to sort of better describe the orientation of the mesh  because when you scatter instances onto an object,  the scattered points are going to inherit  the local orientation of your input object.  So for example, if I use a box instead of a template,  and I'm just sort of scattering onto that box,  that looks weird.  You can see that when it's scattering,  if I look at the box and actually visualize the normals,  you can see that it's got these vertex normals that are,  this is hard to describe, but basically,  if you were to look at the point,  like if I dropped down a normal stop  and create point normals on this,  you can see that they're all sort of facing out diagonally.  And by default, when you scatter something  on an object like this,  it's going to read the normal attribute of each point  and then sort of smoothly interpolate  along that primitive based on where  on the primitive of the point is scattered.  And that's why you end up with something like this,  when you scatter is that it's trying to basically point  towards the corners and then blend in between.  And the way that you would solve that  is by basically breaking apart the faces,  the points of the corners aren't fused.  And that's what a lot of these options are for in here.  This is common stuff that you'll deal with  in Instancing, who do you need all the time?  I'm just exposing these controllers for you more easily.  So you can just click facet and now it's going to try  and break them so that they, like,  or I can also hit reorient.  Maybe I want to invert the normal.  Maybe I want to invert the up vector.  I can compute a completely new one from Polygons.  There's a lot of operations in here that you can use  to basically determine how you want your orientation  to work or you can just do it on the blocks directly.  So for example, I could facet here,  break it apart and just say,  Cust Polygons are even just unique to points completely,  set the Cust Bangalda zero.  Now if I look at the normals on this,  they're going to be completely face outwards  and then I can just turn it off here.  And now you can see that everything is sort of facing  directly outwards along the surface normal.  So it's like, each face has been broken apart,  so it's not interpreting anymore.  So again, you have options.  The instance there is just trying to make  a lot of this stuff simpler for you  so that you don't have to do it yourself in nodes  every single time.  The last thing that I want to go over here,  not the last thing, but like one other quick thing  that I want to go over here is that under the sorting tab,  I brought this up earlier,  but you have this name prefix and a start number  and ID start number.  This is sort of an important,  one of the few little gotchas with mobs  is that mobs intends for every point to have an ID attribute  so that when it's trying to match the transforms of things  to like line up A and B,  it's not dependent on point order.  It wants to use an ID attribute.  Any mobs generator, or almost any of them,  is going to automatically create these ID attributes for you.  So if I, you know, if I click on this  and then go to my spreadsheet,  you can see that there's an ID attribute,  which by default is just the same as the point number.  And there's also a name attribute,  which is called piece and then just uses the ID of the suffix.  And I could change this,  I could just call this like pig head.  And now you'll see that everything is going to need  pig head zero through whatever.  Where the name attribute comes in,  more often is when you're doing RBD simulations,  everything needs to have a unique name attribute  if you want them to solve as independent objects.  So because, you know,  there's a lot of overlap between RBD sims and instances  and pack transforms,  mobs gives you controls to handle the stuff automatically.  If you're not using mobs to create these things,  there's another attribute that will go into later  called mobs convert that will help just  add these attributes for you automatically.  But it is important if you're getting unexpected behavior

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\mops-motion-operators-for-houdini-part-1\frame_016.jpg

### Unique Naming [49:54]
**Transcript:** to check and make sure that your ID attribute  exists and it's unique for each point.  If you're in a situation where like you have two mobs streams,  so like let's say I have two templates here.  And I'm just gonna take, let's see,  I'll just have these instances to something else entirely.  Let's just do a grid, the default grid again.  Or I don't know here.  Oh, I didn't have anything connected to it.  That's why, sorry.  So let's change this to grid.  So we've got our basic things here.  If I were to merge these together,  and then sort by ID,  you can see that I've got multiple points  with the same ID now.  And this is where,  this is why these controls are exposed to you  on the instance there and also in mobs convert,  is because if you have multiple things with the same ID  or the same name,  they're going to solve as the same object  and a lot of mobs and other operators in your DDR  going to potentially get confused  because they have the same identifier.  So the reason these controls are exposed  is because if I have multiple streams  of geometry going through,  I can just say, like,  let's set the ID start number to 10,000.  And now I have a unique,  sort of I have this safe separation between the two streams.  So if I run other operations on this merge stream later on,  you can see that now I don't have duplicate values  in the chain.  So keep that in mind if you're getting unexpected behavior  with mobs nodes,  like you can see I'm going from 9.11 here  to 10,000.  It's just like a safe border between the two streams.  This is something that commonly trips people up  when they're first starting with mobs.  It's like make sure that you have a unique identifier  on everything and use these controls  in either the instance or in mobs convert  to force that separation.  One important thing to note,  when we're going back,  let's just go back to this first instance here  when we're going to the template geometry.  I'm going to set this back to Craig.  If you have an animated meshed here instance into  that has a changing point count, interpolation will not work.  And so if you're trying to use the mobs instance,  or to copy to let's say particles  that are being emitted constantly,  an important thing to note here  is that you need to turn off template interpolation.  So you would just switch that off entirely.  If you're using something like an animated sequence  like Craig, you'll see that now the points  are basically kind of rattling around all over the place  and it's not consistent where they're copying to.  But in a particle simulation,  you would need to turn this off  because points are going to be birthing  and dying constantly.  So again, something to keep in mind,  template interpolation is only something you should turn on

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\mops-motion-operators-for-houdini-part-1\frame_017.jpg

### Grid Distribution [52:39]
**Transcript:** if you're copying to a geometry that's deforming,  not something where the topology is changing every frame.  So real quick, I'm just going to drop down a pickhead  and a rubber toy,  and let's do a template head.  And I'm going to use match size again to just make it,  because these things all have different scales,  I'm just going to turn on scale to fit  and then copy that to each of these.  And then wire these into an instance.  So again, this is going to seem pretty familiar.  I'm going to take the global transformer,  and shrink it down.  I've got all these guys randomly instance here.  So let's say I want to be more selective  about what's being copied where.  I'm going to make a template geometry,  and this is what I'm going to copy to.  So let me just drop a null down here.  I'm going to call this template again.  I guess it's going to be template one  because I already have one of those.  Yeah.  So I'm going to go to the instance,  or again, go to the distribution tab  and set this to mesh and then drag this in here.  And so now it's going to be sort of scattering  over these points.  I'm going to change this to points from scatter.  So now it's literally just copying to each of these points  on the grid.  Maybe let's make this a little smaller so that there we go.  OK.  So a couple of things you're going to notice right away.  First of all, the orientation is going to be weird.  And this is because, and again, this  is going to get esoteric, but it's  because the normal and up vectors of the grid are the same.  This is a grid that's facing straight up,  and so the normals are facing the same direction.  And that's why this thing is getting confused.  There's a couple of different ways that we can fix that.  We could change the orientation on here using a MOPs transform.  Or we could literally just set, for example,  I could go and use a set-up point wrangle  and set end-up to be whatever I want.  But that's why they're facing this way,  instead of facing in the default orientation,  in case you were wondering.  OK.  So to set this in such a way that I basically use  so that I can pick what instance goes where,  there's a couple of different ways that you can set this up.  But what you need is a sort of an index attribute.  And you can sort of think of this as the same as the variant  attribute or the piece attribute on copy to points  where it lets you pick what primitive goes to what point.  MOPs has sort of a similar helper node to do that for you.  The first thing I'm going to do is just create that attribute.  And there's a number of different ways that you can do that.  But just as a quick example here,  I'm going to really quickly just jump the gun here  and put down a shape falloff.  And what falloffs do is conceptually,  they can do a lot of things in Houdini.  But really what it's doing is just setting a float attribute  on every point.  That's it.  And you can see when I click on this,  I have this attribute called MOPs falloff.  And it's just a float between zero and one on each of these points.  If I click Preview falloff, it's just going  to visualize that as a gradient.  So this is all it's doing is the value is one here and zero here.  And it's based on this simple shape  that I can enter in the viewport to grab the manipulator  and then change this to adjust those point attributes.  And we'll go into more into falloffs later.  I'll then introduce this other thing here called MOPs index  attribute that basically can take that value that MOPs falloff attribute  and then remap it into something else.  So I have...  I'll...  Again, I'm going to explain more of how this works later.  But you could also just use like an attribute randomize.  You could use...  I think Houdini introduced something in 19 called attribute from pieces,  which you could also use.  And that's something that works with their new variant setup.  But really the important part of this is that you're creating an attribute  from...  You're creating an integer type attribute that's just describing what index  of the instance are you want to copy to each point.  So if I click on this, you can see that it creates this MOPs index attribute  and it's from zero to two based on the value of the MOPs falloff.  If I go back to the instance here and I'm going to turn off falloff previews  so these things don't get colored.  If I then go back to the instance tab and go to indexing mode,  instead of random, I can say point attribute.  I can also do ordered and then it's just going to do one, two, three, one, two, three,  like just copying to each point in order.  But in this case, I can go to point attribute  and by default, it's going to look for something called MOPs index,  which is what this index from attribute does.  But you can use any point attribute you want as long as it's an integer.  Now you can see that based on how that falloff is positioned,  it's reading those in.  Those attributes from the falloff are being converted to integers  based on their existing values.  And it's turning into either zero, one or two,  which refers to zero, one, or two, the three inputs that go into the instance.  And now I can actually just move this around and you can see that it's just going to copy  whatever you want based on the input index of that shape falloff.  This is just sort of to be like a quick taste of like how easy it can be  once you get used to how falloffs work to make big changes to a flow  just by moving simple things around.  But again, like if you wanted to use any other generator,  like an attribute adjust integer or any of those other sops that change  or set point attributes, you don't have to use index from attribute  or a falloff to do this.  You can use whatever you want.  OK, does anybody have any other lingering questions about the instance?  Sure, it's a complicated node and I can't go into every single setting for this.  I'm just trying to explain conceptually what it's trying to do.

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\mops-motion-operators-for-houdini-part-1\frame_018.jpg

### Q&A: Template Object Review [58:36]
**Transcript:** But if you have questions about specific things, it's not a bad time to ask.  Oh, sure.  So if you want to instance to a mesh, if you go to the distribution tab and set the type to mesh,  what it's going to do by default is it's going to scatter onto that mesh.  But to set it, sorry, I just have to move my zoom window here,  you can either use the path selector here and just point to what is template one  and just grab it there or you can just literally drag this node right in here  to set it as a template object.  And then by default, this is going to be on scatter mode.  So you're going to see it looking something like this where it's going to scatter  a gazillion points over this thing.  And if you want it to scatter, then you can just go below the mesh distribution method  here, you can go to scatter and then this is just like the scatters up.  So maybe I want 100 points and it's going to randomly scatter them.  But if you want to copy directly to the points of your input template,  you just change this from scatter to points.  And it also has a few other options here.  You can scatter to primitive centers.  You can scatter to edge centers.

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\mops-motion-operators-for-houdini-part-1\frame_019.jpg

### Q&A: Use From Variance [59:45]
**Transcript:** You can turn the whole thing into voxels and then scatter to a voxel grid  if you prefer working that way.  There's a lot of different ways you can do it.  Yes.  So this is something that, and again, the instance there was built before Variance  existed, which is why some of this might be a little bit confusing.  Let's say that I'm just going to copy this over here.  If you're used to working with the new Variance method where you would have,  let's say, these three objects, then you merge them all to a single stream.  And then you would copy that to points.  So I have ABC here all merged into a single stream.  And what I would do is I would use a namesop or something like it.  You could also do it in Vax to basically just say this object is named Pighead.  And if I click on the primitive here, you can see that there's a name attribute  that's just Pighead now.  And the attribute, yeah, we can just leave it as name.  And then I'll copy it to here and we'll call this toy.  And we'll call this head.  If you're doing this with the traditional copy to points setup, so I have a grid here.  And I want to do copy to points.  Actually, you know what?  Instead of using a name attribute, we're going to, this will work.  It's fine.  Anyways, I'll copy this here and this here.  And then you're going to see that everything is going to be copied at once to the same  point.  I'm going to turn on packet instance so that these are on instance.  But you have this option to do a piece attribute where I can set this to be name.  And now what it's going to look for is on each of these template points, it's going to  look for a name attribute that matches one of these three objects.  So actually to make this a little bit easier, why don't I change this to a point wrangle?  I'm just going to say I add variant equals zero.  And then this one is going to be one.  And I'm basically just setting a number for each one of these as a attribute and two.  And now what I can do is essentially randomize this.  So I'm doing attribute randomize.  And then I'll call this variant and then set it to be a random number between zero and  two, one dimension.  And then actually that's going to make it a float attribute.  This might be easier to do with Vex.  I'm sorry if there's like a more modern way to do this.  Sometimes I default the Vex by accident because it's just easier for me to think this way.  What I can do is say I variant equals zero one, Rand's PTNUM.  So randomly picking a number between zero and two.  And then I'm going to cast this to an integer.  And so now I have this variant where if I look at my points here, it's a random number  zero one.  I might need to generate a random number between zero and three to make this work.  Now I've got some twos.  So I have this variant attribute that's an integer attribute.  And then I have it on these as well.  And then I'm going to change the piece attribute to variant.  And now you have a different one copied to each one based on the random value.  So this is sort of the newer way of doing things when you want to decide what object gets  copied to what point.  If you want to use this with mobs, if you have like this sort of merged geometry and  you want to use this, what you can do is mobs has a sync called ad from variants where  you can, you know, right now it's, it doesn't have any inputs and it's copying to a grid.  What it'll ask you to do is basically pick that merged geometry.  So I'm going to grab merge to.  And then it's going to ask you for what attribute you're using as the variant for this.  So I'm going to click this one.  And now what it's essentially going to do is create a bunch of object merges.  And I apologize for this.  I have to sort of relay out the window now.  So what it's doing is basically merging those things in and blasting the things that you  don't want.  And then wiring those in is inputs to the instance.  And then I could grab this same grid if I wanted to with that, with that attribute I set  up.  So let's go to distribution, set this to mesh.  I'm going to grab this point wrangle here is my template.  And then change this to points.  And now it's essentially going to do the same thing where it's just wiring those copies  in and picking.  So the only reason to use this really if you want to use that button is if you've already  got a bunch of stuff configured in the new way where you have like all of your object streams  merged into a single stream.  And then you want to distribute using the instance.  My advice is if you already have something set up this way and there isn't just another  specific feature of the instance that you're trying to use, just use copy to points.  And then you can give it an ID attribute and then just continue using mobs.  It will work either way.  Yeah, yeah, this stuff will all work interchangeably.

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\mops-motion-operators-for-houdini-part-1\frame_020.jpg

### Fragments [65:18]
**Transcript:** So it's up to you how you want to work with it.  But it's still all point attributes under the hood.  It's just sort of using it in a slightly different way.  Just really quickly moving on for the instance or temporarily.  I'm just going to drop down a new node here.  And this is going to be, we'll just call this convert.  And again, the original source file for this is included in that zip file.  So if you want to dive in and see exactly how things are set up and all the different  parameters, you can open the same files that I'm working with and follow along that way.  Although I recommend that you drop these nodes down and like play with them to get a sense  of how they work together.  So tying into what we were talking about earlier with, you know, sometimes you want to use  the instance there is sometimes you don't.  We have mobs convert.  So just as a quick example here, I'm going to create a sphere.  We're going to make it, it's a polygon mesh by default.  And let's say I want to, I'm going to fracture this and then I want to make each one of  these things sort of a, its own mobs primitive.  So I'm just dropped down a nice offset to turn this into a volume.  So now I have a fog volume that I can scatter inside.  Sorry, let's do scatters up.  And let's just do 100.  And then I'm going to do a Voronai fracture.  This is, you know, just an old school simple Voronai setup.  So I've scattered points inside this volume and then I'm running those to fracture the  geometry.  So now I have all these individual fragments here.  Now let's run mobs convert.  So by default, what mobs convert is going to do is very simple, similar to what the  assemble shop does where it's going to take every individual connected piece and turn  it into a packed fragment.  Without going into too much detail on it, the difference between packed primitives and  packed fragments is that packed primitives all have to be the same.  Packed fragments can all be different chunks.  So you can still have multiple different packed primitives in a single stream, for example,  any of the copy to points variant stuff that we were doing before.  But the assumption under the hood is that you don't have, you have lots of copies of  a selected pool of objects.  Fragments are something that you'll see in any RBD destruction sim.  It's very common there.  And the idea is that you're storing every possible chunk as a single piece of geometry  and then basically picking and choosing from that giant chunk.  So fragments are better optimized for things where every piece is unique, but you still  need to treat each piece as its own object.  I hope that makes sense.  But by default, this is what mobs convert is going to do.  It's basically take a bunch of chunks of geometry that you have and turn them into single  packed primitives.  So I have 1700 polygons and this first one from this fracture operation.  And now I have exactly 100 pieces, like one for each of those points that I scattered.  The other thing that mobs convert does is again, all the stuff that the instance there  did for you.  You get the ID start number, you get the name prefix.  It automatically is going to generate all of this so that it's ready to go with the rest  of the mobs system.  And it's also ready to go in RBD since like anything involving bullet.  So this is what it's doing by default.  But there's other ways to use it.  For example, let's make a Paul.  I love messing with these test geometries.  I get a kick out all this stuff.  So we've got a Paul and we've got poor Louise.  Both of you guys don't even work at side effects anymore, but they're still getting abused  by all of us.  And then really quick, what I'm going to do is just I'm going to use the name SOAP to be  able to separate these guys.  So we'll just call this guy, G-O-2.  This is because these guys both have this sort of confusing name attribute under the hood.  It's just a quick correction to make up for some weirdness with these things.  Don't worry too much about it for now.  I'm going to merge these guys together.  And now, and again, this ties back into that original variance question.  I'm going to create a grid and then use attribute from pieces.  Just one of these new fancy nodes that, who do you release to essentially do this  instant thing, to be able to pick which one you want.  And on attribute from pieces, I'm just going to pick mode random.  And what this means is like for each piece attribute that it finds for each unique name.  So some of them are names you can see that if I click on this guy, or if I just click on  the merge, you can see that under primitive attributes, or sorry, I believe it's point  attributes.  Some of these guys are names, sorry, where is that attribute?  Here we go.  Here's the name primitive attribute.  You can see that some of them are named G-O-1.  And then the ones under Louise, I manually named G-O-2.  So this is the variant attribute, essentially.  This is what's separating them.  So I'm going to grab that name attribute and then just randomly attribute from pieces  is basically giving you a couple of different ways to take that attribute and randomly assign  things to it.  So it's very similar to MOPs index from attribute.  It was just released very recently.

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\mops-motion-operators-for-houdini-part-1\frame_021.jpg

### Naming and Workflow [70:30]
**Transcript:** But it essentially serves the same function.  It's just native Houdini using the way that they expect you to set up these networks.  I'm using this as an example because you can take vanilla Houdini copy to points workflows  and use these with MOPs interchangeably.  It doesn't matter.  So real quick, I'm just going to use a point wrangle and I'm going to set my end and  up attributes because if you remember when we were instantaneously that grid earlier,  everything was just pointing in a weird direction.  It's because the normal and up factors are the same.  So there's a couple of different ways that we can sort of just set our orientation to  be the default.  One way is to say n equals 0, 0, 1 in curly braces like this.  And then up is 0, 1, 0.  Or you don't have to do both of these.  You can do one or the other.  Say p at orient, which is a, I can't even describe what p is supposed to mean in this case.  But basically this determines it to be a four, a vector four is 0, 0, 0, 1, which is  like sort of the default orientation.  Either these would work.  I'm just setting this so that by default all of my points are facing the default way  when I do the copy operation.  So now.  So thank you for catching that.  It would have been overwritten by the orient anyways.  This attribute supersedes these two in the copy to points order.  So now I'm going to copy these guys here.  I'm going to make sure these are packed so I don't break everything.  And then I'm going to set p's attribute to be the name.  And now I've got these sort of random pauls and luises everywhere.  And that grid, I think my viewport got stuck.  I'm sure that's happened to a lot of you guys where the viewport has sort of dead geometry  that's stuck in it.  If that happens to you, if you have side effects labs installed, and I recommend that you do,  in labs, if you go to help, you can go to reset viewport.  And now it's going to fix it highly recommend labs and that shortcut because this is a bug  that's existed in Houdini basically since it's inception.  Okay.  So the reason that I would, through this whole setup is like again, this is sort of the  vanilla way that you would modify, you would set up randomized copies of things using Houdini  19, it's a relatively new workflow.  I can use mobs convert again because if I go to this copy of points thing here and click  on this, I have a name attribute that's set up for each of these, but they're the same,  right?  It's inheriting that name attribute from the original and I don't have IDs.  So if I try to run this into an RBD simulation right away or if I try to use this with mobs  potentially, it's going to get confused.  So mobs convert, if I go to here and then set the input type here to packed primitives  because what I've copied in here are already packed prims.  All it's going to do is give you options to override the ID and name attribute.  Because it didn't detect an ID attribute, it's automatically going to add one whether  I have the override on or not.  And then I can also use this to override the name because I probably don't want these things  to all be named geo one and two.  As is, if I had these things with the same name, all the Luises and all the Paul's would  solve as a single object in a simulation, which is not what we want.  It's going to come in as one giant tangled chunk.  So I can hit override name attribute and now it's actually going to give each one of them  a unique name based on the start number and the name prefix that I've set.  So if you want to use traditional ways of copying the points, you can do that.  And then just if you want to just really quickly and conveniently get things sort of mobs

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\mops-motion-operators-for-houdini-part-1\frame_022.jpg

### Q&A: Convert Node Explanation [74:03]
**Transcript:** ready or RBD ready, use mobs convert and set it to packed prims mode and now it's ready  to go.  This is a, it's almost a viewport glitch.  So what's happening is the way that the viewport displays polygon normals for polygon geometry  versus packed primitives can sometimes be different, especially if your source geometry  doesn't have an explicitly defined normal.  So if I fracture this and then click on it, I don't have a, I have vertex normals, but  the cusp angle is set in such a way that it's like it's not going to give you hard edges.  And I know this is kind of confusing, but if I, I can go in here again and then this  might fix it.  If I just set the normal angle to be zero, so everything is, is perfectly hard.  I know it's still going to display weird like that, isn't it?  Sometimes this is enough like if you, for example, if you were to like take a box and  then instance that, you'll see this a lot like all the boxes will have these weird soft  edges.  So I'll just take the global transform down.  You can see that they all look kind of weird and it's because they just don't have  normal information on them.  If I add vertex normals to the boxes, they'll display normally.  There's just, there's the, the, who do you viewport is sometimes weird and fussy about  how it describes things that are packed because as soon as you, you say that something has  been packed, it's, it's a reference.  Like now you have a bunch of points in your geometry stream and each of those points  are pointing to a reference of something in your, in your geometry stream somewhere or  even on disk.  And the viewport won't always show them the same way.  But if you, you know, this looks weird, but if we go in here and unpack after the fact,  we should get our old normals back the way they were.  So let's just disable this.  Oh, yeah, it's cussing for you in polygons.  Thank you for that catch.  By default, it's cussing the polygons for you when you, when you roll them in because  a lot of times when you're doing these fractures, you don't have normals.  I think it's actually might be a recent addition for us, the Voronite fracture to create  normals for you.  I don't know if it always did this, but yeah, that was the issue.

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\mops-motion-operators-for-houdini-part-1\frame_023.jpg

### Explode [76:28]
**Transcript:** Sorry.  Nice catch.  Okay.  Moving on.  Another generator that you want to use quite as commonly as instance or convert is explode.  And this is similar to something, I don't know, similar for D well, but I'm pretty sure  that there's a similar modifier that may also be called explode.  But what it does is essentially allows you to take polygon faces and turn them into  individual packed primitives.  So I'm just going to create a template head.  And then just run this right away through mobs explode.  So I have 52 92 polygons in input stream and coming out of mobs explode by default, I've  got 52 92 packed fragments.  So each one of those primitive faces becomes a packed fragment packed in place with the  centroid of each packed primitive at the center.  I don't know if you can see this easily, but you can see that there's like the centroid,  the point that represents each one of these packed fragments is of the center of each one  of these faces.  What it also does is when it does the packet, orient each face so that it's locally, you  know, any kind of transform has sort of a local orientation.  Like what do I think forward or positive Z is or what do I think up positive Y is?  It orient each one of them so that they're facing outwards.  What that means is if I want to translate something, if I want to translate these like in  local space to like make them go outwards, I can use mobs transform to push them outwards.  So for example, I'm just going to do like 0.02 and they're all going to go outwards along  the original direction of each primitive normal.  So it separates them and then sort of turns each one into an object that you can manipulate  with the rest of mobs as if they were completely separate pieces.  You can also optionally use attributes or clustering modes to sort of customize how you  want these pieces to be defined.  So I'm just going to really quickly go to the explode settings here and then when you  go to define pieces, right now the method primitive number means that each primitive becomes  its own piece, but you don't have to do it this way.  You can either give it an attribute, so like provide it with some other piece attribute.  You can break each primitive, you can break things apart by primitive group.  If you have groups defined on your primitives, each unique group name will become its own  chunk or you can just use the built in clustering attribute.  And what this means is you essentially just to say how many pieces do you want and then

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\mops-motion-operators-for-houdini-part-1\frame_024.jpg

### Q&A: Manipulate with Falloff [79:13]
**Transcript:** define a random seed and it's just going to randomly fragment them into sort of spatially  oriented pieces.  Yes, I don't want to go into Dops just yet.  That's going to be for a later lesson, but let me try to take your question one step at  a time.  When you're defining these clusters, you can provide a piece attribute instead of using  the primitive number to fragment them each.  So I could, for example, generate a random primitive attribute between, let's just call  it chunk.  So I add chunk equals same thing, FITO1, RAND, and then we'll fit that between, let's  say we want five clusters, and then I'll map this to an integer.  Actually, I didn't do this at six.  I need to do this before they explode.  And now if I just say my piece name here is chunk and then go here, it's literally  breaking it into five different chunks, but it's random so it's not spatially oriented,  I guess.  If I wanted to do this with a falloff, then I could, and I'm jumping the gun and falloffs  that didn't want to go into this just yet.  I can take this falloff and then again use that index to attribute mode, or I could  use attribute from pieces, either one would be fine.  I'll use index for attribute for now.  And let's say I want to take that falloff and break it into, let's say, five chunks.  And it's still called mobs index, I'll just change this to chunks that I don't have to  change my value later.  Now when I go into mobs explode, let's see, does this need to be a, I've got to promote  this, sorry, it needs to be a primitive attribute, so I'm going to promote it.  We're going to promote chunk from point to primitive.  And now when I explode, I've got five chunks, and when I transfer outwards, you can see  that it's breaking apart into five pieces.  So that's how you would customize it at this level.  And if you wanted to sort of individually modify each piece, again, I don't want to go  into the, in the dots just yet, but like, there's a number of different ways you could do it.  If I just wanted to do it just one of these pieces, I could, you know, for one, I could  use a group mask and just select it and then scale that down individually, or I could use  falloff to do it.  So if I had a falloff after the explode, if I did like a, again, like a shape falloff,  sorry if I'm going out of order here, the plan was to go to falloff snacks.  If I create a falloff here and then let's auto fit it and then looks like it's already  orient, vertically oriented and then scale down.  You can see that it's affecting, it's actually racist group mask.  You can see that it's going to affect each piece at a different rate, right?  So this is how you would sort of customize those things.

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\mops-motion-operators-for-houdini-part-1\frame_025.jpg

### MOPs Trails [82:30]
**Transcript:** But in Dops, it's a different story.  I have to sort of, I think, one step at a time.  Does that answer most of your question?  Okay.  Okay.  And then moving on to the last one that I wanted to cover here for this lesson is trails.  And Mops trails is basically a quick way to generate temporarily stable trails from input  geometry.  So real quick, because we are, this is going on a little bit longer than I had planned.  I am going to take a grid here.  Let's just make it three by three to make it a little easier to work with and then make  it three columns, three rows.  So just simple little grid here and then I'm going to copy this.  So copy and transform.  And then let's just make four copies and translate each one by one and why.  So now I've got this little stack here.  And then I'm going to use the adsop to turn these into just points.  So adsop delete geometry, but keep the points.  And now I just got this sort of little break of points here.  And then I'm going to sort of give you another sneak preview of a modifier called the Mops  Noise modifier, which just uses a noise pattern to move pack parameters around.  It's really straightforward.  But what I've got here is, you can see that these things are all sort of randomly adjusted.  And I'm just going to scroll down to the bottom here and turn on time varying.  And what this means is that when I scrub the timeline, these things are automatically  just going to be moving around in a noise field.  So I've got all these different points dancing around.  Once I add Mops trails, what it's going to do is for each point, it's going to generate  a temporarily stable trail that's automatically going to emit from each one of these things.  The advantage of doing this over the traditional trail stop is that it mostly guarantees that  these things are not going to jitter, especially if you have to resample them for any reason.  They won't jitter over time.  And you have the ability to adjust the output so you can change like the length of these  trails.  So I can make it so that no trail could be longer than a certain number of units.  So right now it's two units.  And so they'll automatically clip on the way out.  You also have the ability to generate, by default, they'll generate clean UVs.  So you could run these straight into a sweep stop, for example, and they'll have clean  UVs on them and they'll be temporarily stable.  So if I were to sweep these into tubes, for example, and then compute UVs, they'll, I don't  know if you can see this easily, but as these things sweep, you can see that the UVs  don't change.  So they'll be stable throughout the entire length of the animation.  That's sort of the advantage of using this node.  Otherwise it's really simple.  It really just generates trails that inherit from what you're doing, but the temporal stability  is the big advantage in that they won't jitter.  When you resample them, the disadvantage is that in order to keep things stable so that  nothing jitters in the so that UVs are consistent, it essentially has to run it.  It needs to run your input points through a solver.  So it's not going to be as fast frame to frame as a manual trail setup, but it's just  going to be a little easier to work with than long run.  Anyone have any questions about this one?  Okay.

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\mops-motion-operators-for-houdini-part-1\frame_026.jpg

### Orient Mesh [86:05]
**Transcript:** We're getting a little behind schedule here, so I'm going to move on now to modifiers.  Again, you can open up the hip file if you want, although I recommend following along  and dropping nodes if you can, but the file name here is 0-3 modifiers.  I'm just going to start a new hip here.  Okay.  This is where a lot of the real utility of Mops is going to start coming in.  Modifiers are how you're actually setting the transform in Transix or the template attributes  of incoming geometry.  So I'm going to just name this guy a transform.  That's the first operator we're going to go through.  So let's start by dropping down a pig head.  And then I'm going to make a sphere.  And then I want to copy these pig heads to this sphere, but I want them to all be looking  straight outwards.  If I do a copy to points by default here, and I just turn on packet instance and then  why are these guys in?  By default, you can see that they're all going to be facing in kind of a weird direction.  Let me scale down the pig head here so you can see a little bit better.  But they're going to get a little bit confused towards the top.  The orientation isn't necessarily consistent with the tilt.  The reason for this is complicated, but again, it has to do with that same normal and upfactor.  And when you don't explicitly define normal and upfactors on these copies, Houdini is going  to try and guess what you mean by normal and up.  And they can't be facing the same way.  So you end up getting some strange results if you don't explicitly define what you want  the orientation to be.  Because this is a annoying thing to do manually most of the time, there's a utility node  inside mobs called mobsorient mesh.  And if you drop this down, what it's going to do is essentially generate these things  for you.  Now this result, as it is, isn't much better than what we had before.  Without getting too much into the math of this, the reason is because of auto up.  This is what Houdini does, what it assumes if you don't have an up attribute is it's  going to try and guess what up should be based on the difference between the surface normal,  like so where the normal is facing and where the default positive Z normal is.  So it's going to take that difference and then apply that to up in exactly the same way.  90% of the time, that's not what you want, it's not the right guess.  If I turn off auto up and then explicitly set an up factor, so now I'm having them all  face towards up, now each of these guys is facing directly outwards along the sphere and  you're sort of getting a cleaner result.  I'm just going to take the rows and columns down a bit so we don't have as many of these  things because I want to get like a sort of a clearer picture of what's going on when  we start doing the transforms.  So now that I have these things copied and ready to go, and I could put a mobs convert  and here to add the ID for this example, we don't necessarily need that because this is  pretty simple.  But I'm going to drop down a mobs transform modifier.  Mobs transform modifier is what was one of the notes you're going to use all the time.  And what it's doing is allowing you to use sort of more familiar transforms like what  you see in a transform stop in terms of being able to define oil or rotations or like  basic scales or whatever and it's going to apply that retroactively to the pack transforms.  What a really important note here is that by default mobs is going to do this for each  primitive in its own local space.  By local space, I mean that each of these peg heads sort of has its own idea of what  forward is and what up is and that it's internal idea of what those things are is not the  same as what world up or world forward is, which is represented by that little nomen in  the corner.  This little guy here.  So as an example, I'm just going to write a really simple expression here in the rotate  y.  I'm going to say at frame times five.  So if I scrub the timeline, you're going to see that each one of these guys is spinning  locally on its own y axis, its own up axis essentially.  So they're all going to be moving around like this.  This would be extremely annoying to do if you were doing it by hand.  If I turn off local space, you can see that now these guys are spinning along world  y.  So each one of them is spinning as if they were on a stick that's facing directly up  as far as the world is concerned.  So this is a really important point like the way that mobs is working.  It's running for each point.  And by default, it's running in local space on all these things simultaneously.  And again, just to drive the point home, if I would use a traditional transform stop,  a regular transform considers this entire geometry stream to be a single object with  a single pivot.  So if I use the same expression here on the transform stop, it's rotating everything  at once.  So this is the big difference about what mobs is doing versus what vanilla Houdini is doing

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\mops-motion-operators-for-houdini-part-1\frame_027.jpg

### Aim Basics [91:00]
**Transcript:** for a lot of these transformation operations.  Mobs is running in local space individually for every single point that you input.  Okay, great.  We're just going to do this as a quick survey of other nodes then in the interest of time.  So the next one I want to go into is mobs aim.  And this one is sort of like the transform, but it gives you a different interface for  how you want to rotate things.  So the simplest example to use this for is I'm just going to drop down a pig head.  Like always, I'm going to drop down an instance.  And let's make this a slightly bigger grid of pig heads.  So I'm going to turn the global transform down here.  And then in order to make it a little bit easier to see what's going on here under  distribution, I'm going to change the fixed the size here of the grid to be, let's say  this big.  Let's do like yeah, about four.  So now I have a few more instances to look at.  And now I'm going to drop down mobs aim.  And you only need one input for this thing to work by default.  And you first activate it by default, it's going to be in aim at object mode.  And this means that there's a single object that every point is going to look at a single  goal.  And you can kind of see it.  I don't know if you can see it on my viewport, but there's this little controller here  that you can use.  If you hit enter, you'll get a manipulator for it.  And now you can just drag it around.  And every single one of these instances, let me just put it up here.  So you can see it is going to be looking at the same target.  This is a simple way to use mobs aim.  It's just everything looks at one single object.  I'm just going to take this same network here, copy and paste it.  If you don't want to use that default control, you also have the ability to use your own.  So especially if you have complicated pivot structures or something.  So what I'm going to do is I'm going to use the control stop.  It just generates sort of generic control objects.  I'm going to move it slightly off center so that it's up here somewhere.  And I'll change the control type circles because I just think that one's a little bit easier  to see.  And then what I'm going to do is rotate it so that it's sort of spinning around from  the center point.  That's the reason why I offset it.  Let's see this in a second.  In the transform stop, I'm going to use that same expression I used before, so frame  times five.  So now this thing is rotating, is translating essentially, but through a rotation.  So it's just going to be moving around in a little circle here.  I can wire this directly to the aim target on mobs aim.  So for example, if I go here, I still have this manipulator and everything's looking  to the center.  But these two optional inputs here are inputs for aim targets or up targets.  So I can wire this in here and it's automatically going to read this and say, oh, okay, this  is what you want the aim target to be now.  So now if I go in here, you can see that the guide object is automatically snapping onto  where this thing was already.  And if I drag this, you can see that they're all going to be following that target.  And so this means that you can basically any single point coming in from sobs or packed  primitive.  You can wire this in and everything will be aimed at that same exact location.  Let me just keep going here.  So again, I'm going to copy this same network.  And I'm just going to do a quick transform stop.  I'm going to take these input pig heads here and I'm just going to move them up by, let's  say, one unit.  So and again, these are not polygon objects.  These are points, right?  So I have an equal number of points with the same ID as I do in the original.

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\mops-motion-operators-for-houdini-part-1\frame_028.jpg

### Custom Aim [95:08]
**Transcript:** And if I wanted to, if I don't want to see these points, maybe it's easier to not think  of them that way.  I can just use an adsop delete the geometry, keep the points.  And now I just have this little simple point right here.  Now what I can do is drop down lofts aim again.  And again, I'm going to wire these in as the aim vector.  But instead of aim at object, what I'm going to change is to this to his aim at points.  And so what this means is that each one of these pig heads is going to be trying to aim  at the same target that was input to it.  Let me just, sorry, getting Holocaust something here.  And the way that each one of these is going to find that matching point is by using the  ID attributes.  So again, I have this ID attribute that's unique on each of these points.  And it matches those of the original.  And now what I can do is let's try another MOPs noise modifier on these aim points.  And I'll just turn on time varying again on the noise modifier so that the cloud of points  here is like randomly shifting in space.  And then what I might do is just turn the amplitude down in Y so that they're not moving  in Y at all.  So they're just shifting around on that plane.  And now if I scrub the timeline and look at MOPs aim, each one of those pig heads is  going to individually be looking at the target that matches the ID attribute of the packed  primitive.  So if I scrub this around, each one of these pig heads is going to be trying to look at  that matching point.  So you have a lot of control here.  Like if you need to be really specific about where each of these packed primitives is aiming  towards, you can drive it this way.  And I don't go into it in this example specifically, but you have similar controls for managing  the up vector.  So this third input can accept up targets as well as aim targets.  Let's just go back to the first example here to make it easy.  By default, it's not going to, it's just going to, if I go to the up tab, it's just  assuming that you want a single up vector.  So 0, 1, 0 up is up.  But it doesn't have to be that.  You can also use up to object.  And now you're going to get this green square controller.  So it's a separate manipulator that you can then drag around.  And now this defines the up factor.  So all of these things want to be looking up.  But if I scroll here, you can see that the up vector is now facing towards the screen  cube.  And this lets you, again, to define any orientation.  This is something that's just consistent throughout all of 3D graphics.  An orientation has to be described at a minimum by two vectors, a forward and an up.  So if you're just aiming and you set this thing to its default settings, it's going to  assume, well, you probably mean world up to be up.  And so everything is going to pivot around as if that's the up vector.  So that can get really hairy if you're up in normal vectors or too similar to each other.  Because as those two vectors converge, it starts getting harder and harder to really  define where that thing should be spinning.  And that's when you start ending up with instances really rapidly flipping.  You'll see flipping artifacts or other weird snapping behavior.  And it's because rotations become harder and harder to define as those two vectors become  close to each other.  So having the up control here means that you can be a little bit more specific about  where you want those things to go.  And you don't have to go up to object.  You can also do up to points and use the same feature that we used earlier here where  we defined one point per per pack primitive to define exactly what the up vector to be.  So you have a lot of control there for like how you might want to aim things or orient  them.  There's a few other things to go over in here that I don't want to spend too much time  on.  When you're defining what you want your up and aim axis to be, you can customize this.  So if you don't actually want to aim using the forward axis, which is Z by default, you  can say like actually I want to look, I want to aim along X.  And now the X axis which is the side for these pigs is going to be facing at these instead.  And you have other similar options for like inverting the aim vector, inverting the  up vector.  You can also use constraint around up, which is a little confusing.  But what it basically means is that if you want things to only aim rigidly.  So like for example, they can they must be constrained to their up vector.  You're going to see that everything is pointing towards this cube here.  But if I move this around, you can see that they're basic.  It's almost as if they're stuck on a pin.  Like they can only rotate around that defined up axis when they're aiming.  So it's a really useful one when you're trying to do.  Is it need to look as if they're rotating on a very specific axis so they can't freely

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\mops-motion-operators-for-houdini-part-1\frame_029.jpg

### Q&A: Normal & Up [99:42]
**Transcript:** move about?  Or if you're doing like mechanical rigging things like that, that's where that constraint  comes in.  When you were saying the converging of the world axis and the local axis, why do they  even converge in the first place?  So it doesn't want over it.  Doesn't the local override the world when you're doing your rotations?  Axis that I'm talking about are normal and up, which is sort of in who Dini convention.  It's the end and up attributes to find how things should be copied.  And the reason for it is that and this is more stuff I want to go into more in the math  section is that I can just really quickly just set up a wrangle here to show you what  this means.  You guys don't have to follow along with this if you don't want to.  I apologize for this for leading on so much effects here.  So really quickly I'm just making a control here where I can define what end and up are.  So n is going to be positive z, the default y is going to be positive y also default.  And then if I get a bunch of pig heads here and scale them down and then copy them to  these points.  So right the catch is that if these two things are the same like as they get more and more  similar, you can see that it doesn't even change because it's starting to get confused  about what these things actually.  It's hard to do this with effect or controls.  How can I better explain this?  Without going into math it's kind of tricky to explain what this means.  But essentially if you're if you're n vector, you're forward vector that defines where  something is oriented is and you're up vector, which is defining how something is facing  up.  Those two things like what you really need are three axes, right?  You need x, y and z to determine how something is truly oriented in space.  Using the cross product in math, which we'll go into later, you can take that of forward  axis and an up axis and use the cross product to find that third axis because the cross  product gives you an orthogonal vector to the first two input vectors that you get it.  So that's like the classic right hand rule.  You have you know vector one, vector two and then vector three is what you get us a cross  product out of it.  Those three vectors that x, y, z determines how something is oriented in space.  If those two vectors are too close to each other, so you're n in your up, start getting  closer and closer and closer until they're like two parallel, you can't get that third  vector.  And so it's basically a mathematical artifact where once you get too close to that area,  that's when you'll start seeing instances start to jitter.  Like if those two vectors are animated, like you'll start seeing like shaking, jittering  and then finally like a flip or like a quick snap, that's the reason behind it happening.  So the best case scenario is your n and up factors are as close to orthogonal as possible

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\mops-motion-operators-for-houdini-part-1\frame_030.jpg

### Randomize [102:57]
**Transcript:** meaning that they're perpendicular.  I hope that answers that.  Sorry, that just demo did not work as well as I don't.  I'll go more into this in the third section.  Okay.  So next up, I want to talk about a modifier that you will use easily as often as you use  transform and this is a randomize.  So I'm just going to make a new container called a randomize and dive in.  And let's just mix it up and use the squab for this one.  I'm going to pipe it into an instance.  And let's just set the we're going to turn the scale of this thing way down.  So let's turn the global transform to zero five and then frame this.  So I've got all these squabs.  And then let's just drop down a mouse randomize.  And what you're going to get is this interface where you can basically just toggle on what  you want to randomize.  So like I can randomize position and then give it a minimum translate and a maximum translate  and each of the three axes.  And then pick a seed and it's just going to randomize them.  Orientation is even easier.  Just click it and they're going to be randomly oriented and all three axes.  There's a separate seed for this.  You can just dial this in however you need to.  So that's all this is meant to do.  I can go down to scale.  You can either randomize scale and all three axes or you can individually or you can just  do uniform scale and then set your minimum maximum, adjust the seed.  It's pretty straightforward but it comes in handy in just a ton of different situations  because you're always going to want to add randomness or some amount of chaos to make  your sim feel more natural.  Just to make things a little bit more complicated, let's drop in another poll here and then  I'm going to instance these guys in let's say let's do a line this time.  So I'm going to go to distribution, change this to linear and change the length of the  line so that we've got these polls kind of spread out here.  Let's do 10.  And then to randomize this again and I'm just going to randomize orientation on a single  axis.  So I'm going to turn off the minimum and maximum to zero on x and z so that he's only spinning  out on y.  One of the important parameters here is the step parameter because there's a lot of cases  where you're going to want to randomize things but you don't want things to be 100% random  and every axis you want to be able to strain it.  The step parameter operates in degrees so if I set this to let's say 90, now you can  see each of these polls are facing in one of four cardinal directions.  So you can lock the amount of randomization that you want to a specific step.  I can change this to 45 and now they're going to be locked to 45 degree angles.  The same thing applies to position as well so if I want to randomize and have some of  these guys be exactly one meter above the others, you can set my translate maximum to  one and then set my step also to be one.  And now you're going to get some that are popped up a meter and some that aren't.  Just to drive this home a little bit further, I'm going to drop it, I'm going to make  another fall off here and this is something that I'll, I'll go into more when we start  talking more about fall off.  So I'm just going to turn off the position fall off to make it a little bit easier to  look at.  I'm going to hit auto fit on this and that just means that the shape is going to be distributed  along the entire line of things here and if I preview fall off, you can't preview on  this.  But basically I have like a zero to one shape going on here.  I'm going to drop down another randomize.  And this time I will randomize, let's just do scale.  So and let's just just see to whatever you can see that this guy isn't changing much  but these guys are changing a lot when I adjust the seed and that's because by default  all of these modifiers are looking for a fall off attribute in order to decide how much  of the effect that we want to dial in.  So if I turn off fall off, you can see that everything is being evenly randomized.  But if I turn it on again, I can take this shape here and move it back and forth and  some of these guys are going to start shrinking more than others based on the value of fall  off.  If I move this shape all the way over here, everything has a fall off value.  You can look again, check the spreadsheet of zero.  Randomize won't have any effect.

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\mops-motion-operators-for-houdini-part-1\frame_031.jpg

### Noise Basics [107:29]
**Transcript:** So this is something that will go into more when we start talking about falloffs, but  all of these things can be modulated.  The effects of all of these nodes with few exceptions can be modulated by a fall off attribute.  So I'm going to jump out and then make a new geometry network and we're going to talk  about the noise modifier, which is also another really handy one that can get you a lot  of cool effects for cheap.  So we're going to start with the template head and then I'm going to just run a mobs  explode on this.  So we're going to break the head up into individual fragments.  And we can probably just leave this at the default settings.  I don't necessarily think we need to do any clustering or anything.  So by default, if you drop down a mobs and noise modifier,  and then we're probably going to have to adjust these settings because I think this is  going to be pushing these points out.  Oh, yeah, it's like moving them way too much.  So I'm going to scroll up here where it says effect position.  I'm just going to scale this way back.  So zero point zero three roughly.  So that it's changing a little bit, but not nearly what it was.  And then I'm going to go to the noise properties here and just change the frequency to be a  little bit higher because we're dealing with a small object.  So let's just do six.  So by default, what it's going to do is apply the noise if we scroll back to the top here.  I'm sorry, if we scroll down to the noise properties, the noise signature is vector.  And that means that it's the noise field, you know, the whatever function that you pick  in this case, I'm using curl noise, but you have a lot of different options for what  noise function you want to use.  So it's going to move each one of these pack primitives according to that noise field.  And you can use the amplitude controls to dial in individually, like how much you want  the noise to affect it on each axis.  So this is sort of like the straight forward way of using it, you know, just apply noise  and then you can, you know, like if you ever used VOPs before or any other attribute  noise, there's like offset values and you can sort of animate these in order to make the  noise field move.  This is sort of the simplest way to use it.  If I take a the same function, and I'm just going to set the noise signature to float  instead, what this means is that each piece is going to be moved outwards along that same  noise function.  So if I move the offset here, what is essentially doing is acting almost like a peak  stop where everything is going to be moved along its local Z.  And that includes points.  You could apply this to a mesh if you wanted to, like for example, if I just took this  original template head without the explode and ran it through vector mode here and just  animate the offset, you can see that it's essentially doing the same thing, although I don't  have normals computed.  So I'm probably going to have to do this and then apply the normals to the points on  the normal stop.  And now if I animate this, you can see it's kind of acting like a peak stop, but with a  noise function.  The other thing that I want to show you is, let me just go back to this example, down  at the bottom of the noise field, rather than having to animate the offset parameters,  it's an automatic little setting here called time varying.  If you turn this on, it's going to make the noise function automatically evaluate or automatically  vary over time.  And the speed of it is determined by the time scale parameter down here.  So if I turn this to like 10, it's going to make the noise field that much faster as  it evaluates.  The other really handy thing here that you should know about is looping noise, because  we all love those looped Instagram videos where everything just makes a perfect seamless  loop every time.  If you click on looping noise, you can define a loop period.  And this basically means the time and seconds in which you want the noise function to recycle  itself.  So if I, you know, two seconds at the default 24 frames per second means that it's going  to take 48 frames to loop from one to the next.  I'm just going to set my timeline to be 47 and then play through this.  And you can see that it's going to make a seamless loop.  So you can set this loop period to be whatever you want.  You can mix that with time scale and mix that with the other parameters of the noise in

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\mops-motion-operators-for-houdini-part-1\frame_032.jpg

### Custom Noise [111:50]
**Transcript:** order to get seamlessly looping noise, which is going to really help if you need to be  really precise about your starting and ending point for a particular sequence.  And then just one other thing that I want to show you here before we move on.  I'm going to just take this same setup here with the explode.  I'm going to make another noise modifier using roughly the same settings.  But I'm going to go up here to where it says mode.  There's two ways to use the noise modifier.  You have simple mode, which is what we're seeing, which is effectively fully procedural.  And then we have a Zect mode.  And at Vect mode, if I turn this on, basically treats this like a solver.  So at the beginning, we're not going to see anything because we haven't run any time  steps yet.  But with a Vect mode on, I think I'm going to leave the rest of the settings where they  are, but I might add effect rotation.  Now as I drag the timeline, what it's doing is it's running all of these pieces through  that noise field over time.  Let me just extend my timeline so we can see it.  Do this better.  So this is effectively a simulation at this point.  It's going to take these things and move them through that noise field over time.  I'm going to turn off loop time varying.  Now we have a static noise field.  And so you can see it's like these pieces are eventually going to take the shape of that  curl noise field and move through it over time.  The orientation bit of this, when you're in in Vect mode, is affected by aim weight,  which is sort of an easy way of saying how much do you want each piece to point towards  the direction of motion over time.  If I turn off effect rotation completely, you can see that all it's going to do is just  move the pieces.  It's translating them over time.  But effect rotation will blend the direction of motion into the noise field so you actually  have these things aiming towards it.

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\mops-motion-operators-for-houdini-part-1\frame_033.jpg

### Q&A: Attribute Noise [113:48]
**Transcript:** So it's almost a particle simulation at this point where they'll point into the direction  of flow as they move around.  Does anyone have any other questions about this?  Not really.  The usual mobs sort of limitations apply where like you want to make sure you have an  idea attribute just in case the mobs noises, a lot of them, not all of them, some of them  are default HDD noises, but some of them are custom.  There's a few noise functions in here like the mix minima noise or the mosaic noise that  are better custom.  And so I can't guarantee that they're going to run as quickly as an attribute adjust  noise will.  So the time varying option requires two separate noise functions to be calculated and then  blend it into each other in order to work.  And so it's going to naturally be slower because it has to evaluate the noise function  twice per point instead of once.  But that's really it.  Otherwise, these are effectively the same thing.  And in effect mode, you have a couple of other like convenience options that might help  you.  If you're using the mobs trails, you can automatically drop trails out of this if you want to, if  you enable output trails.

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\mops-motion-operators-for-houdini-part-1\frame_034.jpg

### Q&A: Modify Weight [115:16]
**Transcript:** And there's just a few other sort of convenience nodes in here that are for you, but you could  just use attribute adjust noise on the points instead if you don't care about rotation.  And that would be fine.  Yes, absolutely.  So if I go to this, let's just go to the procedural noise modifier.  This is the next section really.  But if I only want to affect certain parts of this, again, I could use the simplest fall  off that I have is the, or one of the simplest is the shape fall off.  Sorry.  And so I could, let's just auto fit this.  Looks like it's roughly vertical.  Yeah.  Okay.  So if I, if I've got to run this, you're going to see that the points at the bottom are going  to be affected more than the points at the top.  And I can adjust that based on, you know, the position and orientation of this control.  So like, if I only want to affect, you know, I could flip this upside down and then only  effect like the top of his head, maybe move this up here.  And now if I animate this, you can see that it's only affecting certain parts.  So almost every modifier that you can work with, respect fall off in one way or another.  I'll go into that in a second, but you can be really specific about how you want to define

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\mops-motion-operators-for-houdini-part-1\frame_035.jpg

### Falloff Basics [116:32]
**Transcript:** what the follow-up attribute is or what it looks like and how it affects things.  Does that answer your question?  Okay. So now I want to go into the last big section of this, which is the fourth file,  0,4 falloffs. This is sort of the other main category of mobs to talk about.  Just a second. I'm going to open this file in the background.  Okay. So I'm going to make a new container here and then drop down a poll.  And then let's just instant him really quickly.  And let's say, I don't know how many do we need.  Let's do a global transform of about a quarter of what he is now.  So 0.25. Yeah, that seems like it'll work.  Okay. So first, let's drop down a mobs transform modifier.  And I want to, let's say, rotate these guys 90 degrees on Y and scale down by 0.5.  Now I have all these little balls.  On any modifier, you're going to see this option called do falloff.  And that means do you want to apply falloff to these things or do you want to affect them uniformly?  And then you're going to have this option called falloff attribute, which is this is any point-based  float attribute. So any number between 0 and 1 that you want to use is the weight of the  operation that you're applying. Right now that that attribute exists. But if I go to mobs falloff,  you can see that it's one for every single point here. And that's generated by default by the  instance. Or it just sets a default falloff so that if you apply a modifier without being specific  about it later, everything gets affected. But if you if that falloff attribute exists and it's  different per point, it's going to affect how this thing behaves. It's going to it's just a sort of  a scale applied to the up to every modifier operation. So the simplest falloff that you can create  is the plain falloff. And this is just sort of a it's so simple that it's really just a little  convenience node. But plain falloff basically just sets that attribute for everything at once.  So I have this falloff value here and I can scale it. And you can see that as I scale it, the effect  of that transform scales the same way. So if my falloff value is zero, nothing happens. If it's one,  the full weight of the operation happens. So pretty boring. From this instance,  there is just drag it over here. And then let's make a shape falloff. And this one I've already shown  you guys a few times as far as how it works and what it does. But I'm going to click on this.  And then you can see you've got it and I don't know how easily you can see this on my monitor. But you  get these two blue squares. And this is essentially the handle that defines the falloff. I'm going to take  the same transform and copy it after the fact and then put this on so you can see what's going on.  You can see that it's already each poll is being affected differently based on where it is within  that shape. If I click on this shape falloff here and click preview falloff, what this is going to do  normally and it's sometimes hard to see because this guy already has a shader and who needs viewport  can be a little bit weird. Let's see. Can I delete? Yeah, let me just run an attribute delete  on the material so that we don't see it. Hopefully that'll make this a little bit easier to see.  Okay, for some reason, my viewport is not wanting to display color right now.  And so this is a good...

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\mops-motion-operators-for-houdini-part-1\frame_036.jpg

### Falloff Color [120:39]
**Transcript:** Oh, yeah, there it is. Thank you for pointing that up.  If you're in a situation where you can't preview falloff and most commonly,  it's because of the issue that Armin brought up or it's because you're working with packed fragments.  Again, if you were to run a shader sim and then pack it as fragments after the fact,  Houdini's viewport cannot see vertex color accurately on packed fragments. It just won't work.  Or I'm sorry, it can't see the point color attribute in the Houdini viewport. If you're applying it  to packed primitives, you can see it per primitive. But on packed fragments, the point color attribute  can't accurately affect the color of packed primitives. They'll all turn the same color at once.  So when you're in weird situations like this, where for right of a reason, you can't preview color.  Under falloff preview, we have this option called display of sprites. If you turn this on,  and then you can adjust the scale, like right now,  Paul's scale is a little bit weird. These sprites are aligning themselves in a strange way.  But you can sort of change this or override it entirely and then just drag this down so you can see  what's going on. Falloff preview is just there so that you can see this accurately in situations  where the viewport won't allow it to happen. If I go back to shape here,  I can hit enter to grab the manipulator and then move this around and you can see that each point  is changing colors based on the falloff preview ramp. I'm just going to turn off the display  of sprites because it's working down the geometry. So if I highlight the transform modifier now  to look at this geometry and then I'm going to turn off falloff preview  and then I'm going to click in the view here so that the preview geometry turns off  because it's really annoying. But I still get my manipulator and now I can just drag this back  and forth and you can see that the position of the shape and also the orientation effects  how that falloff is applied. And if you click on the shape falloff, there's a lot of different kinds  of, let me just go back here and turn on preview again. There's a lot of different shapes you can  use. Linear isn't the only option. I can use spheres and so now I have a sphere shaped falloff  that I can move around. There's an inner and outer radius. You can affect sort of the width of  the falloff effect. There's a box. So if you want to do like use sort of a volume where you have  an inner and outer cube, there's a torus. There's a radial wipe which you can sort of use to define  like you define an angle range. So if I turn this up, it sort of fans out and then use this to  control the spread, either fan fanning in or fanning out. So there's a lot of different options you  have for just really quickly creating these values. And I want to emphasize that this is just a  point attribute. There is nothing special about mobs falloff. There's nothing special even about  the name. So if I were to, let's just change this back to a spherical one just to be simple.  And then look at this modifier and you can see that, especially if I exaggerate this,  the guys on the inside are being affected more than on the outside.  If I go to this falloff attribute here and I call this, you know, foo, you can see that now  all these guys are being manipulated the same way. But all you need to do is just make sure that the  falloff attribute matches. What this allows you to do is not only use multiple shaped falloffs to  mean multiple different things without interfering with each other because it's a really common problem  where you might have multiple falloffs kind of stacked up on top of each other, but you don't want  them to interfere with each other. This allows you to basically affect them. It's too completely  separate streams. So you can line this up. What this also means though is that I could use, for  example, attribute randomize instead of the shape falloff. And I'm just going to, you know, I can  call this whatever I want. So now this is B A Z is my attribute name. I'm going to define it as a  one dimensional uniform value between zero and one. So if I look in here, then as it's like all  of these numbers. And then if I set this, now everything is randomized. And I can go here and adjust  the seed. And it's affecting it the same way. So falloffs are really convenient for spatially  setting float attributes that go between zero and one because that's what mobs wants to see when  waiting operations. But you are absolutely not limited to using mobs operators to do that.  All it wants is a float point attribute and that can be anything that you want it to be.  Let's keep going with other falloffs. There's also noise falloff.  And this one works a lot like the other noise operators in mobs where this is turning for  preview falloff where you have a bunch of input noise functions. They're all one dimension,  or they're all float noise in this case, not vector. And you have those same controls for, you know,  amplitude, frequency to turn that up. You can make them time varying automatically. So now you can  see that it's going to cycle over time. And then again, I can just grab this transform modifier  and paste it here. And let's turn off falloff preview.  And same deal, right? So you're just using a noise function to change the effect. And this way,

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\mops-motion-operators-for-houdini-part-1\frame_037.jpg

### Q&A: Falloff Functions [125:52]
**Transcript:** especially for simple things like where you don't, where you want to affect only one channel,  or you don't want to affect rotation the same way as position, you can just use, you can just define  position A, position B, and then use noise falloff to randomize it to get your more organic behavior.  Another thing that I should point out is that almost every falloff function comes with built-in  controls for remap. So if I go to the remap function here and then enable fit, this will be  easier to see if I turn on falloff preview. If I turn on fit, what I can do is just set an input  and output a minute max. The output minute max, you're very likely going to change because most of  the time falloffs you want between zero and one, but the input can help, especially because every  noise function, it's minimum and maximum range is a little different. Some noises are clean  values between zero and one, some are between like 0.2 and 0.8, some are between negative 1.7 and  1.7. It really depends on the noise function, and it's not something that you can necessarily always  know. But what you can do here is basically just drag it until you start seeing those dark blues,  that's your minimum, drag this until you start seeing things close to white, that's your max.  And that's a little contrasty, but it should work. And you also have a ramp that you can use here,  so you can fine tune exactly how you want that interpolation to work. And that's all built in for  you. And now apply this to the modifier, and you get, you know, now our noise function is a lot  more pronounced, and we're getting like good peaks and valleys in the final effect.  The last thing about the basic falloff stuff that I want to go over here is falloffs all have  blend modes built in. So again, I'm going to take the same exact transform and wired in here,  and then wired this noise falloff into this plane falloff. So if I set the blend right now,  because the plane falloff is set to one, it's really not affecting anything. And I'm just going  to turn off this preview again, because it's getting in the way. But you have blend modes here. So  let's say I like this noise function, but I want the whole function to fade out over time. What I  can do is just set this to multiply. And then now that it's multiplying, I'm getting the full  effect of the noise function, because whatever it was times one is the same. But now I can dial it back.  And so you could keyframe this one attribute as a multiplier over the entire thing. And that's  any falloff. So if I wanted it to only multiply within a given spherical area, I could do it that way.  All of these blending modes are built into every single falloff note.  I think that's it.  Mops combined falloffs is that blend mode, but exposed. So internally, if you look inside  any of the mobs nodes, it's using Mops combine falloff to do it. But it's there as its own node for  you if you want to do it that way.  There's a number of sort of lower level tools that you see that you won't usually use by  itself.  Like, for example, preview falloff is its own node that you can drop down if you want

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\mops-motion-operators-for-houdini-part-1\frame_038.jpg

### Q&A: CHOPS Workflow [128:56]
**Transcript:** to, but every falloff has its own preview built in.  So a lot of these tools are actually for me to use so that I can copy the same preview  logic into every single HDA and not have to rework it.  So, I don't want to go too far into chops in this just because that's a completely separate  topic, but in the end, if chops are affecting point attribute values, that's all you need.  So you could either generate a signal using chops or you could take existing attributes,  like existing animated, you know, mobs noise or mobs transform attributes, import those  attributes into chops, process them through a filter or a jiggle or a bounce or whatever  it is that you want to use.

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\mops-motion-operators-for-houdini-part-1\frame_039.jpg

### Splines [129:48]
**Transcript:** And then once you're done, use the channel stop to read those values back in as a float  attribute and then apply that as a falloff.  That's totally valid.  I just, I can't whip together an example for you in the space of this class because we're  already running over time.  Falloff nodes.  So I'm going to jump out and this is going to be the spline and object falloffs, which  are sort of more complicated ways of generating falloff values.  So real quick, I'm just going to make a box stop, give it some vertex normals and then  I'm going to make a grid.  And I'm alternating between copy to points and the instance there just to sort of double  down on the fact that you can use either, you know, you're not limited to one or the other,  you can do this anyway you like.  So I've got this great a box is here.  I am going to let's see.  Next thing that I want to do is just draw a spline, something that's going through this  grid here.  So I'm going to, there's a curve stop and just draw, you know, anything, it doesn't really  matter, just something.  The next thing I'm going to do is resample it because I right now it's coming in as a  bezier curve and mobs sort of as a convention wants to work with polygons and packed  permitives.  It doesn't really understand nerves or beziers very well.  So the resample is going to turn this into polygons, just a really quick, easy way to  do it.  And then I am going to drop down a mob spline falloff.  And your packed perimeter is going here and the spline goes in the second input.  And if I turn on preview falloff by default, what it's going to do is define your falloff  based on the distance to the spline.  So uniformly throughout the entire spline, you have a minimum and a maximum distance.  And I can crank this if I need to.  And this basically just determines sort of the amount that it's going to fall off.  And if I use like a transform operation here and rotate this along why you can see that  it's just really all it's doing is taking the distance to the spline and using that as  a falloff.  You have more advanced options for this though.  For example, you can use distance times curve position.  And this is good if you're trying to sort of show something changing over time as it  reaches the end of the spline.  Distance times curve position basically means, and I'm going to probably up the minimum  distance a bit to give this.  Now, that's the second word.  What this means is basically one side of the spline is going to be full power and then  it's going to fade towards the back.  So this is the front.  This is the back.  And in terms of the curve weight, this is the front end of the back.  So I can sort of taper this off to make it, you know, maybe a little bit more nicely  faded here.  And now if I rotate this, it's the same deal.  It's going to wait one end of the spline heavier than the other in order to generate your  falloff.  You also can just do it by curve position alone.  So if I drag this way down, you can see it's this one is harder because this thing is  probably a little bit oversized compared to what we would need it to be, but it's basically  making this falloff relative to the curve position alone.

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\mops-motion-operators-for-houdini-part-1\frame_040.jpg

### Geometry [133:14]
**Transcript:** And probably need to, you know, this actually may be a bug.  I'll look into this later because it looks like these controls aren't being respected.  So apologies for that, but that'll be fixed in the next build.  I'm just going to go really quickly over to the object falloff because the spline falloff  has less settings on it.  It's not really that complicated.  So let's take the same set up here.  And then I'm going to make a pickhead.  And it should be right in the center here, but I think I'll scale it up a bit.  So let's make this have a scale of about four.  I'm going to translate him up a little bit and then move him just centering him a little  bit better here.  And then what I'm going to do is make a transform.  And all I wanted to do is have this guy just kind of spin in place.  So I'm going to set his rotate.  Why to be time times honored.  So now he's just spinning around.  Next, I'm going to take all these pack frames I made and run them through a mock object falloff.  And then turn on pretty falloff.  And so you can kind of see what this guy is doing is that based on the position relative  to the mesh, like what's contained, it's going to set the falloff based on that.  And it's going to update over time.  Why default your area of influence is the inside.  And I can just turn the radius up here and you can see that it kind of fades up this  over time.  But you can also go outside, which is essentially the opposite.  So turn the radius here.  You can see that anything outside the mesh will be, we'll have the maximum falloff value.  You can use the distance from the surface, which means that it's going to essentially  be like a sign distance field where it doesn't care whether it's inside or outside.  It only cares about the rough distance from the field.  You can also use volume samples.  So if you have a scalar volume, like a fog volume, and you want to sample that directly  to use as the falloff value, you can do it that way.  And point cloud will essentially take a completely disconnected cloud of points in  Houdini and use the distance to the nearest point in order to describe the falloff.  So you can get pretty specific about how you want these things to be organized.  Another thing to note about this really quick is that most falloffs also have built-in  noise functionality.  So to make this a little easier to see, I'm going to just give myself some more rows  and columns here and then just turn down the size of the box a bit so that we can get  a higher resolution noise field.  If I add, click on add noise.  You can see that it immediately just scatters the effect of the falloff here.  This applies to shape, it applies to objects, pretty much any falloff node.  It has built-in noise functions with all of the same controls that you've seen before,  including time varying.  So we can just click this and then now we have this sort of, you know, let's disable  this transform here.  And now we have an evolving noise field over time that we can use so like randomly affect  these primitives in a more natural way.  And just to show kind of a little bit more about what this does here, I'm going to disable  the noise real quick here, turn this back on, and then disable the falloff preview.  And let's drop down a Mobs Transform modifier.  And just say, you know, let's scale these up by 10.  Now, let's see, why is it?  Ah, okay, again, because the grid is facing up, it's that same orientation problem that  we keep running into.  I'm just going to set into Z up to Y, and this is something you'll run into constantly.  You could also potentially use Mobs Orient mesh to handle this.  And you can see that now it's scaling according to that pig head rotating.  If I template this geometry, you'll see that it's doing this.  One quick thing here is if you don't want these guys to be scaling from the center point,  I will go into this node in more detail later.  But we have this thing called Mobs Pivot, where I can set the mode to be aligned a bounding  box and just set it to Y minimum.  And you can do this after the fact, so you can adjust the Pivot without changing the positions  of the packed primitives or like adjusting the orientations.  So I can just set it to be minimum Y, and now when I run the Transform, everything is scaling from the base.  I'll go more into this in the second lesson, but this is a good one to know about in terms of being able to quickly adjust Pivot.  Okay, moving on.

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\mops-motion-operators-for-houdini-part-1\frame_041.jpg

### Transform [138:06]
**Transcript:** Are there any questions about those before I go to some of the other fall off concepts?  Okay, I'm going to take that as a note.  So now I just want to talk really quickly about.  Transform fall offs.  And this is not something that's that widely used, but it is extremely handy for certain kinds of operations.  So I'm going to just make another box and give it vertex normals and then make another instanceer.  And just set the global transfer down a bit.  And you know what, let's set this to fixed number instead of fixed size just to show off a different distribution mode.  So what this allows you to do is basically pick a spacing.  It's just a different way of looking at the same problem, but I can pick the spacing and then just say exactly how many clones I want on each axis.  So I'm going to turn this up to like a 20 by 20 grid.  Now let's say I have a shape fall off like a let's do a sphere.  And I'm going to turn on fall off preview so that we can see it set the fall off type to be spherical.  And now I have this little sphere, but what I really want to do is have it rotate around the outsides of this thing.  And that's kind of hard to do like I could use, you know, sign and cosine on the translates for this thing in order to have it sort of spin around like this.  But that's kind of a pain to do.  So instead, but I'm going to do is similar to what I did with the aim control earlier in that demo.  I'm just going to move this guy over here.  So I'm going to drop down mobs transform fall off.  Don't confuse this with mobs transform modifier. This one's slightly different.  What this allows you to do is essentially use a separate anchor to describe the orientation.  So I've already made this offset from the center for this shape.  I'm going to wire the transform fall off into the second input of this fall off.  Most fall offs have this second input specifically for this node.  It's looking for this transform fall off modifier.  What this then allows you to do is then set an expression or a separate function on this.  So I'm going to again use that simple frame times five.  And this is going to act as sort of a pre transform on top of the existing one.  So now when I animate this, you can see that it's spinning around the center.  This is going to allow you to get a lot more complex behavior from not without having to do fancy expressions to do it.  And if I want to change like the distances going at, I could just keyframe this one control as it animates and get like kind of really chaotic bouncing behavior from it.  The other thing that you can do is if you have multiple fall offs, like let's say you're key framing a lot of different fall offs in a row.  But you want them to all move the same way and not have to do channel referencing.  You could drop down a bunch of different, you know, fall offs in a row.  And just chain them all to the same transform fall off and they'll all transform in exactly the same way.  So you can use that to quickly link these things together. And then that way if you want to make an adjustment, you can just adjust them here without having to set up complicated channel reference networks or anything like that.  Okay.

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\mops-motion-operators-for-houdini-part-1\frame_042.jpg

### Spread Setup [141:29]
**Transcript:** So for this next one, I want to show off spread fall off, which is a really handy one. If you've ever looked at any old tutorials about infection solver.  Sorry about that.  Okay, so really quick, what I'm going to do is set up a geometry that I want to spread over. So again, what this is meant to do is sort of replicate that infection solve.  Effect where you have sort of an effective some kind of spreading from one piece of geometry organically to the next.  The nice thing about mop spread fall off is that it doesn't use a solver. So you don't have to do any kind of fancy solvers up stuff. The entire thing is procedure on its all spring quick.  So we'll start with a squab. And then I'm just going to.  So what I want to do is just.  Remove all attributes from this thing just like wipe this out so I don't get this and then I'm going to just name this template because I'm going to be using him a few times here.  So let's start with a box and then an instance or.  And I'm going to go to the distribution mode and set this to be mesh and then drag this template in as the template object.  And then to make this a little bit easier what I'm going to do is set this let's set this to a different one so a veszlustu.  Instead of scatter let's do voxels.  So now I'm getting like sort of a voxel grid effect. I'm going to change the voxel size to be a little bit smaller instead of scattering I'm going to switch this to voxel grid.  And if I go back to the instance tab and set the transform down what it means is that I'm going to get this pretty dense.  Array of bricks. So this is just like again another way that you can use the instance are in ways to distribute things.  So we get this sort of clean look. And I'm doing this because it's just going to be a little bit easier to see the effect of the spread in this case while we have this active.  The next thing I do before I get to the spread fall if is I need to define a starting point.  And there's a number of different ways that you can define where you might want the starting point to be.  One of those is by using is by making a group. So what I'm going to do is create a sphere.  And I'm going to sort of use this as my control to define where I want to start of the spread to be.  Let's just move this guy.  Let's say over here towards the tail.  That should be good enough. I'm going to use groups up.  And I'm going to set this to I want a point group because again mobs like to operate on points.  And then I'm going to try to set this to the second end. And then I'm going to try to base group and then include in bounding regions.  I'm going to set this to bounding object. And so now if I look at this, I've got 82 points in group one, which is fine.  I don't know that I work. I'm going to name this group start.  This is going to be the start of the spread effect. Now I'm going to use mob spread fall off.  And let's turn on preview fall off because this one takes a little bit of work to tune.  So what it wants to know is where do you want the fall off effect to start from.  And then it's going to automatically find all of the ends. So by default, it's going to look for a group mask.  You can also use an attribute. There's a few other options for it, but the group mask is the simplest way.  And I'm just going to call it start. So now with that set, if I go to the animate tab, this is where it's actually determining the motion of the spread.  And so you're not going to see anything right away. What you need to do is animate this parameter here spread.

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\mops-motion-operators-for-houdini-part-1\frame_043.jpg

### Animate Basics [145:17]
**Transcript:** And if I drag it across, you can see it's going to spread from that one area and then push out to the rest of the model.  There's a couple of different ways that this can work. Your distance metric. This is important.  Can either be radius or connectivity.  When you're dealing with a bunch of completely separate packed primitives, like we are right now, you really don't have any choice, but to use radius because there is no connectivity between these points.  And it means that the way that the spread works is sometimes going to jump over joints and things like that that you would normally expect because there is no connectivity sort of influencing how the spread is going to direct.  It's just going based on radius.  The way that it determines connectivity between things when you're in radius mode, the way that it turns the spread order is through sort of a search point.  So what it's going to do is for every point that you have, it's going to look for nearby neighbors within the search radius that you determine.  And then say, okay, you're my neighbor. I'm going to spread to you next. So it's automatically generating sort of a network under underneath this that's saying, like, here's my neighboring points, like a lattice almost.  So as you spread this, it's going to spread over the entire length of this. You can kind of control how much it tapers using the fall off with.  If you're trying to do one of these operations and you notice that there's an area that's not being spread to.  That's often a function of your search radius. So if it's two, if your search radius is too low, you can see that it's going to struggle to figure out the spread because you're not giving it enough room to look for neighboring points.  You can see as it as this goes up, it gets more accurate results. The downside for having a higher search radius is that it's a little bit more expensive to calculate.  But it only needs to calculate this once again, this is fully procedural. So once you've calculated the effect of the spread, you can animate this back and forth and you don't need any kind of solver.  Like the rest of fall off, fall off some mobs, you have noise to so you can sort of get more organic behavior by enabling noise.  So it kind of creeps over this thing a little bit. And all it's doing is just adjusting the position of these things before it computes the network.  If your noise function is too strong, it's possible to break the connectivity between these two points. If you're using radius mode and so you might need to increase your search radius.  And like anything else, yeah, now we can go into the transform modifier.  And let's say we want this thing to like, you know, appear over time, I can just turn the uniform scale down to zero.  And then what I really want for this thing to do when I'm animating it is I want it to, let's say I want it to appear instead of disappear.  Remember that each one of these fall offs has built in remapping controls. So I can just turn on a fit and then set my output instead of zero to one. I can set this to one to zero.  And now I've just inverted the effect. So if I go to my spread fall off and animate this now, it the thing is animating on.  Moving on to the next one, I'm going to use this same template.

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\mops-motion-operators-for-houdini-part-1\frame_044.jpg

### Group Select [148:18]
**Transcript:** And I think actually they'll use the same start group as well.  Let's grab this. Let's just copy this whole thing.  And what I can do in this case is actually, you know what, let's just use the template directly.  So now I have a group of points here.  And I'm going to set start with the same start group. So the setup is the same. But now I'm working on the geometry itself instead of working on packed primitives.  And let's drive around us another spread fall off.  And I'm going to change the distance metric to connectivity.  And so if we enable preview fall off on this spread.  So let's see.  I think I need to change my distance somewhat.  Oh, I need to define my point group. That's what I missed.  Okay. So now the difference to connectivity is you're going to see that in the old in the previous demo where it sort of spread a little bit more evenly left to right.  You can see that here it's crawling up the legs before it makes it down the other side. It's like paying a little bit more attention to the input geometry.  This is sort of the advantage of using connectivity data is these things actually, you know, it's jumping from vertex to vertex based on neighbors that are already established on the mesh.  And you can layer the noise on top of this as well. You can do all of that same stuff. But you're just you're going to tend to get more reliable sort of creeping behavior.  When you're doing something like this. And again, these are effectively template points, right.  So if I wanted to, I could set the mobs transform modifier on these points the same way.  And let's just do the same scaling operation. And then I'm going to go box and give it vertex normals.  And then let's just set the uniform scale to 0.1.  And I could even scatter after this transform operation. I could scatter points onto this thing and then copy them.  And because the scatter points inherit all of those same template point attributes. If I copy to this and then one of these.  Now when I go back here and animate the spread effect, the scale attribute that's set on the template mesh is inherited by those scatter points and the boxes use those template attributes when they're being copied.  And then I can animate the spread. I can get a similar kind of effect. But now I'm getting this connectivity.  And you can see that it's a little bit slower to operate because who do need has to go down this whole chain and recreate it every single frame, which is one of the exam the advantages of using the mobs method of setting the attributes afterwards is depending on how complicated your network is upstream and how many clones you have.  And then you can sometimes be faster to work backwards and just generate all of your geometry once. And then for every future time step, the only thing that you're doing is setting the intrinsics instead of generating your entire network over and over again.  That's something to keep in mind is time dependency is a really big deal.  And if you don't have that badge on usually I have it on, but that's something that you can turn on by hitting D in the network view, going to badges.  And then I'm just making sure that you have your time dependent badge on if you have it hidden don't it's very handy. But what this will let you do is sort of see whether or not certain nodes are being calculated on every single frame instead of being calculated once.  Just a little aside there for you.  Spread fall off is also something that you can use in conjunction with another quick little modifier that I want to show you that I didn't bring up before.  So here's our classic pig head. I'm going to do a spread fall off.  And if I don't want to define an explicit group for the start points.  The group mask accepts a lot of different kinds of inputs. So I can just literally click this little button here.  And let's say I want to spread from the bottom. I'm just going to grab.  I need to be in points mode.  And then I can just go here. That's my start group. Now if I preview fall off an animate it's going to start spreading from here. I'll change this to connectivity. So because this is a mesh I'm going to get better results.  So that looks like it's working.  And then I can pipe this into anything. So let's do something that you should see is mobs clip by attribute. This is a really simple little trick, but it's one that not a ton of people know about.  And then this case is basically pick a clip value and an attribute.  And I can say any points that have a value of this attribute less than this value or greater than this value. So I can adjust this to sort of decide where I want to do the clip.  Are going to be removed. And so if I animate spread value, now you can see that this whole mesh is just really quickly being eroded.  And you're getting smooth edges on this. It's not like just deleting by points. So you're not going to get.  You're not going to get like jittery individual primitives or points being blasted out. It's a smooth transition.  And again, you can add noise to this. You can get really specific about you know, if you want some high frequency noise in here and I want to be less amplitude.

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\mops-motion-operators-for-houdini-part-1\frame_045.jpg

### Q&A: Access Erosion Edge [153:26]
**Transcript:** And like really break up that pattern and get spreads like this with no solvers. So you don't have to deal with a single stop solver.  It's a real simple. It's entirely procedural.  Now, this is a lot of different ways that you can use this and any other fall off with the rest of mobs.

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\mops-motion-operators-for-houdini-part-1\frame_046.jpg

### MOPS w/ SOPS! [153:54]
**Transcript:** You could you could create a group by border edges. So if you need to do it that way, you could turn on a point group turn off the base to include by edges and then I shared edges and now you'll get all of those points isolated.  Okay, last thing for today.  Sorry, it's taken a little bit extra time.  I want to just go over a little bit about how falloffs can be used with sobs that have nothing to do with mobs because again falloffs are just creating attributes and there's something that you can use everywhere throughout who do need where you can use a mask attribute.  So really quickly, let's just try creating a box and then I'm going to use a mobs noise fall off.  I need some more divisions on this box. I'm going to set it to be 16 by 16 by 16. So I get a few more in here.  And then again, all of these you don't have to use these with pack primitives. You don't have to use them with mobs specifically you can use this with with whatever you want.  And what I'm going to do is let's just try.  Sure, simplex noise, and a preview falloff and instead of writing a mobs fall off. I'm going to write to z scale.  Because I can use it for the poly extrude. So let's promote this because when we're extruding, we're doing this per primitive. So we'll have to promote this like we would with any attribute. So I'm going to promote z scale from points primitive.  And then drop down just a vanilla poly extrude stop.  And if you go to local control, there is a tag here for distance scale because you can vary this per primitive with the extrude operation. So if I enable this, the default attribute for this operation is z scale.  So, sorry, I think my display has gotten stuck again.  Oh, you know what what I need to do is I'm going to go into this noise falloff and then remap the output. So I'm going to set the maximum to be something much higher.  And did I successfully promote this? Yes.  You didn't change the distance in the poly extrude.  Oh, yeah, duh. And I also need to change this to individual elements.  There we go. Okay. And I can bring this back down a bit.  And so now, especially if I make this time varying, now I can get like some this quick effect and it's it can be used exactly the same as any other float attribute. So, most artists to use mobs.  Get the most mileage out of falloffs because they're just really easy ways to create attributes that you can use to mask other effects and you can use these with anything else in Houdini.  So another really quick example, I can create a sphere here and then I'm going to use orient mesh.  The same way I did before where I'm just going to create a default orientation on this.  There's this handy thing in here called visualize up vector that you can toggle on and now I can actually see what direction up is facing. So right now it's a little bit wonky.  Just turn off auto up and now we've got this in a place that makes a little bit more sense.  And let's do like a quick hair, Jen.  Just make this interesting. So I'm going to make these hairs on top of this.  I'm going to turn the density way down because I don't want that many. So let's just do 100.  And then it's like it probably make them a little bit longer. Let's try. Where is that option?  There we go.  And then I can use shape fall off.  And I mean, really this can be whatever you want. It's not that important. I'll do a shape like a sphere shape.  And then I'll change this radius to be a little bit bigger and then scale it down somewhat.  But a lot of stops in Houdini except mask attributes. So for example guide process for your dealing with.  And then you can do a process bend. You're dealing with hair.  What I can do is take when you're doing a bend operation, it there is certain attributes that you can configure to basically make it look for attributes to use as masks.  So if I set the attribute as bend here and I set the mode to be an access skin attribute.  This means that it's going to be looking for an attribute on the skin, which is like the sphere, the second input.  So I can set this instead of access skin attribute. I can set this at your access to up.  So now each of these things are going to curl along that up access I define.  I can change this attribute to be something like, you know, let's just do it at 180.  And then the angle similarly I can use this with an access. So where it says.  Sorry, where is that.  Oh, OK, angle where it says this I can go to guide attribute or skin attribute, whatever you want. I'm going to use guide attribute in this case. I'm going to set this to be.  ops fall off.  And now what I can do is move this around.  And it'll affect like locally, which one of these things get bent.

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\mops-motion-operators-for-houdini-part-1\frame_047.jpg

### Varied Animations [159:00]
**Transcript:** So again, any any operation anywhere in Houdini, I'm just trying to drive that point home can be affected by this because it's just it's a flow attribute.  So anything that supports an input like this, you can use mobs fall off with sort of wherever you want.  Let's just do one more quick thing here.  The other situation where this really comes in handy is let's say we've got like a simple pickhead here, I'm going to scatter points on it.  So just have this here and then do a quick noise fall off.  And yeah, Deb, please stop me if I'm I find running out of time.  I don't know you're good.  Let's do simplex and preview it.  Instead of time varying, maybe I'll just set this to be like negative time so the noise is like moving up.  So you can see it's kind of flowing up like a like a flame.  So I'm going to increase the frequency a little bit.  A little bit more interesting and then I'm going to remap it.  So that there's like less points active here, maybe you know, I don't want that many.  I want just a few sort of curling up at once.  And then you know another common thing that you can do a lot in Houdini is you can make ad hoc masks for groups.  So if I want to let's say only keep certain points on here, I can say mobs fall off is less than 0.01.  And set this to be a point group.  And now I'm removing any points.  It's hard to see, but I'm removing any points that aren't meeting that mask attribute.  And so it's just like another quick way to generate easy random data or semi random or even shaped data for using that kind of fall off.  And now just as a really quick example, I could, you know, start using this to influence a particle simulation.  So I could use a pop object.  And then let's drop down a pop source.  I'm just going to take those input points.  So instead of emitting scattering from the surface, I'm just going to emit from all points of the geometry wired into this thing.  And I realize I'm going very fast.  So I recommend taking a look at the example file.  If you want to just go step by step over each of these things.  And then let's just get some wind in here.  You know, let's have it moving slightly up.  And then I'm going to increase the area resistance.  So it's meeting the noise field and then.  Had a little bit of ample student here and then pop solver really quick.  And again, the point is that.  With all this connected, what I can do is decide using simple shape operators, whether it's noise or shape fall off or whatever.

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\mops-motion-operators-for-houdini-part-1\frame_048.jpg

### Q&A: Point Values [161:41]
**Transcript:** To decide where I want these points to emit from just by using them as an ad hoc mask.  So anything that you can do with a point attribute and you can you can use mobs to kind of help you.  Set those values a little bit easier or according to shapes that make more sense to you.  So what this allows you to do is.  For example, like right now the spread fall off as it's spreading is very much like just directly from the bottom of this thing.  But if I wanted to sort of lean the spread in one direction or another.  I could actually use another fall off to do this if that's easier.  So let's do like a shape fall off.  And I'll call this I'll have this one right to cost.  And this is going this way left to right instead of down to up.  What I can do in the spread fall off is basically say consider this cost when you're determining the connectivity between things.  So if I turn this on and then crank this scale.  When I run the spread it's going to it's still spreading sort of from top to bottom, but it's going to be really heavily slanted in that direction.

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\mops-motion-operators-for-houdini-part-1\frame_049.jpg

### Q&A: Final Questions [162:55]
**Transcript:** So turn this down and now it's going to be a little bit more diagonal, but you can see that spreading upwards.  But it really wants to start from the back to the front.  So it's just a way of sort of nudging the spread in one direction or another or trying to get it to evade certain channels until the closer to the end of the spread.  You can add as many starting points as you want so you can start the spread from multiple places.  And could animate it, but the one thing that I can't guarantee is that if you animate it that you're going to get temporarily consistent results from frame to frame.  Because what's going to happen is let's say you have point a point B.  At the when you run spread fall if what's doing before does anything else is determining the relative distance of all of those points from those start points and then mapping that to a zero to one value.  And then when you animate the spread it's basically just clipping at those areas to figure out like where your spread function is going to land.  And that's how it stays procedural.  If you change that frame to frame when it's doing that analysis because polygons aren't perfect when you're in connectivity mode the connections that it draws between those things when it's sort of path finding could be different from frame to frame and so you might get jitters when that happens.  It's not really something that I can easily control against you you would probably get less jitters if you are operating in radius mode.  Rather than connectivity mode but it's still expects expect to have to smooth things out after the fact I would say.  Yeah, if we if we have time I can go over some basics of it and I am avoiding talking about mumps plus in this because I don't want to charge people for for tutorials for software that I'm already charging for.  Mumps has a YouTube channel that's also linked to promotion operators dot com that has a playlist of videos that are mostly tutorials but there's also sort of an introductory video that sort of talks about what mumps plus is about and what it's meant to do.  The wiki also if you look at the node list the wiki has both a sort of an overall tutorial on some parts of mumps plus but also any node that you see on there that's marked plus is a plus only know that it'll give you some sense of like what's actually included in the toolkit.  And if you want to talk to me personally like after these sessions I'm absolutely happy to talk about it I just didn't want to I don't want to double dip so this is a paid story series for free software try to keep those things separate.

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\mops-motion-operators-for-houdini-part-1\frame_050.jpg


---

## Structured Notes

### Core Technique
[PENDING EXTRACTION]

### Summary
[PENDING EXTRACTION]

### Key Steps
[PENDING EXTRACTION]

### Houdini Nodes / VEX / Settings
[PENDING EXTRACTION]

### Difficulty
[PENDING EXTRACTION]

### Houdini Version
[PENDING EXTRACTION]

### Tags
[PENDING EXTRACTION]

---

## Related Tutorials
[PENDING EXTRACTION]
