---
title: Orient UVS like a PRO in Houdini 21
source: YouTube
url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eqXFo0pxdXc
author: cgside
ingested: 2026-07-13
houdini_version: "21"
tags: [uvs, python, hda, matrices, oriented-bounding-box, vex, dihedral, procedural-uvs]
extraction_status: complete
frames_dir: tutorials/frames/orient-uvs-like-a-pro-in-houdini-21/
frame_count: 8
frame_status: complete
frame_selection: content-anchored (manual timestamps chosen from transcript, not blind percentages)
---

# Orient UVS like a PRO in Houdini 21

**Source:** [YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eqXFo0pxdXc)
**Author:** cgside
**Duration:** 22m26s | 1 section(s)

---

## Raw Data (for Claude Code extraction)

Frames captured — see "Captured Frames" section below.


### Full Content [0:00]
**Transcript:** Kind: captions Language: en Hello everyone and welcome back. So in today's video I wanted to break down a recent HDA that I updated that basically orient UVs. So in this video I wanted to show you how you can manipulate UVs and procedurally. So yeah, let's get into it. Basically this HDA takes a set of UVs that are in this case scrambled that I did with these shuffle UVs. So I just rotate them randomly and then it easily orients it up. And even the flat uh islands or that don't have um an aperture boot, let's say, because this is flat on the Y, it will just um set it uh flat like this without rotating them around. So I just wanted to break down how I did this. Then I can show you another example. So let's change this to two for example. And as you can see, it takes a set of UVs and orients them properly. And we can even load the more complicated geometry. So let's look at an example that is an external file. I I believe no it's not this one is the number five. And as you can see this is a more complicated geometry. And we can have a look at the previous result which is the scrambled UVs that I did with these shuffle UVs. And when we apply it we get almost perfectly align. There are some cases that this tool might fail. uh we will get into it uh we will get to it in a bit. So let me change this to zero so we can have a look at this first example. So let's dive inside. Uh there are some similarities to my previous tool which was this orient UV no uh up UVs up. So there are some similarities but this one is the old version that I covered before in the channel. So in this case, this is an updated one. Let me change this to 1.1 and allow editing of content. So this this one was a bit more simple, but again it failed in most of the other geometries that I tested. So I built a new HDA. So let's dive inside. We start by creating a connectivity just by connectiv connected geometry. So is this uh class attribute that we see in here. And for some reason I'm not seeing it. Why is that? So, do I have this enabled? Let me have a look. Oh, of course, I'm I have this uh pinned. So, we just have a class attribute. But this won't be enough. We need actually a class attribute by UV islands. So, as you can see, we have these uh rotated UV rotated UVs just scrambled. And when you do a connectivi connectivity by UV, you might have the same islands if the islands are overlapping. And that's something I didn't know. So what I did is split the UV sims. So split the islands on the split the geometry on the UV sims and then do a group by attribute boundary. And let me get rid of this class. And this will select all the boundaries of the UVs. And then I do a connectivity using that as a sim group. That way I make sure that I I indeed have an unique island attribute. So, let me change this to color and random. And we get um a connectivity by UV or by island. Then there's something we need to do. Since I modeled this, I know that I use some mirror modifiers and whatnot. And the UVs when they get mirrored, they also get reversed. So, in the wrangle, I'm just fixing that. So, let me see if that is visible in here. Not really. But if I do an attribute swap and an attribute promote to promote the UVs to point. So from vertex to point and I do uh this case uh texture to P and let's do flat shading and get rid of that class attribute or that island. And let's see. So in this case we don't have reversed islands but there might be cases where the these normals of the island. So the normals are facing in this case they are not facing because they are from geometry but if we place a normal in here the normals will be facing this direction but in some cases the island might be reversed. So in this wrangle what I'm doing in here is just basically getting the unwrapping the geometry in place. So we don't have to do this attribute swap getting each center point of the island and then we get the prim normal of that unwrapped geometry. So this UV geometry we get that normal and then we do a simple rotation from that normal to the Z axis. So we can orient the islands um the correct direction. So we we do the diagral. So just rotate from one vector to another to make sure that if the prim normal is facing the negative Z axis, so we invert it on the UVs, we face it to the positive Z axis, which is the orientation of the UVs. Then we just subtract the pivot. So we rotate it in place and we rotate the UVs with that pattern that we created in here. So nothing too complex, but that's an ex uh an important step. I can actually show you later in some cases that happens. So not in here, but anyways. So then I need to promote this island attribute to a point attribute. So we can also access it there. And then I am measuring this is the first step. I am measuring the position.y for each piece. I'm measuring the gradient of the position.y on uh by piece attribute. So by the island and I'm measuring that in UV space not in in position space. So I can show you that uh so up. So let's have a look at that. So if we measure in position of course this will just point up because this is positiony. But if we measure in UV space that won't look much but in UV space this will represent the positiony which means if I promote this and uh unwrap it as you can see we will have an aperture routing in UV space which tells us where which way is up basically. So this again is a very similar approach to what I've done before but in this case we will just use this in some cases because there are some other cases where this doesn't apply. Let me just isolate the piece in here because looking at this for all the pieces will be confusing. So I'm just going to blast. Let me see which island. So if I come in here and select by marker let's see island number four. So if we blast here on primitives um at island is equal equal to four and we get this and since we will iterate over all the islands we also need this attribute promote in here. So this is these are temporary nodes. So let me just place them like this. So in now we just have a single island to look at which will make this more simple. So then we need to promote this island attribute to a maximum. So we have the amount of the number the maximum number of islands. In this case we only have one because I isolated this one. So we can actually have a look at that. So this is all clear. Uh so we need another one. We need um another connectivity. Sorry. We need another connectivity in here. So in here because we need to calculate again this is just temporary. So let me actually place this. So if we didn't do this we have 13 islands or in this case 14 because it starts from zero. But here I need to isolate just one island and we will have a max value of zero because it's just one single island with the ID zero. So we're just promoting to the maximum in this one. So then we comes the complicated part where we do all the calculations. Uh the first thing I'm going to do is to basically we need to find an oriented bounding box of these UV islands. I know we have the the aperture boot on UVs but that won't be enough for some cases. So the the most reliable option is to calculate a matrix. So a vector that points in Y and on X oriented to the to each UV island. And for that I'm just promoting the UVs to um to a to a point attribute and attribute swapping the island to position. So from texture to P. So now we have this and we need to calculate an oriented bounding box. And I've I've tried many different approaches and none of them gave me a good enough results. So the best solution I found was actually by accident which was this Python function that Odin has called oriented bounding rectangle and let me in here I'm just iterating over the islands and calculating this oriented bounding box. So let's look at that which is this attribute called rot which basically as you can see it calculates uh let me get rid of this uh detail attribute in here. So max. So as you can see I hope that's clear. Let me just increase the size of that of that vector of that axis I mean. So as you can see this is calculating the oriented bounding box. As you can see we have um this matrix that aligns with our UV geometry and needs to be UV geometry not 3D geometry. That's why I'm swapping this to the UV to position. And yeah, basically I had to do this with Python which was the most reliable option. I also did it in here as you can see with um like in a manual way. It's procedural but more manual. This one this Python one calculate uh without uh too much work and let me go through what I'm doing in here. So uh I don't I don't think we need to import this because it will import by default. But basically we have a note which is this current node audinit.pwd pwd and we have the node geometry which is the instance of this geometry then we need to select we don't want to iterate over the current geometry which is the easy island we want to just create a single point with a transform attribute or with this matrix so basically we just gather the geometry from the first input so node inputs one dot geometry as you can see I'm uh connecting in here the first input which is this geometry then this python node is not like the wrangle that we iterate over numbers, points or primitives. This just does one iteration. So in order to gather the point positions for all the points that we need for the oriented bounding box, we need to create a list of the positions which is what I'm doing in here. Storing all the points position as vector 2. Then we do the oriented bounding box which is just this function oriented bounding rect. There's also a 3D version. I don't remember the name but you can have a look. So we just save it in a variable and we feed in the the point positions of the of the geometry. In this case I did this version which which is just a rectangle a matrix 2. This will output a matrix 2 because this is flat geometry. This is just geometry uh living in the xy plane. So in the UV space then from this function we get several outputs. We can get the center. So the geometry center which is the oriented bounding box. we get the orientation which is a matrix too and we get the size of the bounding box. So this uh size back is called size back. Then we can there are some checks that I'm doing in here. Basically I'm getting the width and height from the size. Then I have uh in here um a check to see if the if the island is square. So we don't have to to rotate the UVs um with the oriented bounding box because if it's square it can't find really a good uh matrix for the orientation. I can show you some examples later but for example in here it's okay but in some flat islands it might not look uh it might not get the proper orientation. So I'm just saving here an attribute uh for those cases. So I'm do the check to see if the height is similar to the width and then we need in order to create an attribute in Python you need to actually edit. So in this case I'm saving it as a square attribute and initializing it to zero. Then I'm saving the matrix. So basically converting from a matrix to a matrix tree because I will need a matrix tree. So I'm just getting the orientation as a tpple. uh so it's easier to to convert it to a matrix tree which I'm doing in here. Then I'm also creating the attribute for the rot matrix which is just this and then I just create the point at the center of the mesh because in here I'm not I'm not connecting the first input. So I just want to create geometry then I set the position of that point to the center as you can see. Then just setting the attributes of the rot which is the matrix and the square variable. So let's actually look at that is square and in this case is not square as you can see. So uh the ratio is not uh so square. Okay, that was a long explanation and I hope that was clear. Basically that's how I'm doing the oriented bounding box. Let's ignore all of these and just look. Let's say we only have this matrix this check. And then what we can do is just orient the UVs in here. So basically um we do again the the unwrap of the UVs because this geometry is just the 3D geometry not the UV geometry. So we do the unwrapping place then we get the bounding box tender based on the island. So for each island in this case I only have one but this is will process all the islands without a loop. Uh so we get the bounding pend of each island and we read the that rot matrix and then we just invert as you can see we invert that with um we invert the the matrix and we apply to the UVs making sure we don't if we don't do it we don't subtract the pivot and edit later it just it will move the island which I don't want I just want to rotate it in place as you can see. So as you can see it will keep the center point. It will keep the pivot. That's what I'm do. So that's basically it. We we just orient the bounding box. We calculate the oriented bounding box and then we rotate the obs. And that as you can see that will uh work. But again we need also to do some checks. Basically in this in this one I'm also calculating an oriented bounding box based. So basically um let me see what I'm doing in here. I'm selecting uh a center point on the mesh and then also doing a near point and from there I calculate a vector and then I just uh set another vector as the Z axis so as the normal and then we can easily do a make transform from this axis and this one we can calculate the other one with the make transform then we add a point and set the attributes that basically it there are some other complications because in here I'm doing by numbers So iterating over each island and here you can see the max islands which I set to the maximum count or the number count in year. Uh this is just to get the bounding box center of each island and I find the prim which has that particular islands and then I can do an point to find the center point. So that's basically it. Then in here I'm just switching by ratio. So if it's square I will switch from one of the one of the matrix. So either this one or that one. As you can see, I'm use is not square. So I'm not switching to this one. So that's basically it. With a select function, we switch between one between one matrix and the other. Then what am I doing in here? This X is aligned Y. I'm basically basically taking this up vector. So we can actually see that. So as you can see the up vector is pointing in this direction that we measured later, which is the position.y. Y and in near so let's actually look at that in here. So I need to so we have this y component of the matrix pointing in that direction but we know that the y-axis is actually pointing in this way. So what I'm doing in here is iterating over each potential axis. So uh doing a for loop uh three times three iterations I mean and start with an empty vector and setting uh a direction and comparing with a dot product if that axis is aligning with the y-axis. So which axis of this matrix which one is closer to this one and we save uh that attribute and then we rebuild the matrix. As you can see now, the y-axis is pointing at the the y-axis of the matrix is pointing at the direction of the measured gradient y. And here I'm just rebuilding the transform. Then we can there's a final check if the if the island so let me do another one in here. So instead of grabbing this island, I'm going to grab let's see one flat island. So let me get in here. So the island number 12. So let's change this to 12. And we get this island in here. And when we come in here, so we will switch by ratio. So as you can see, we are re if we look at the oriented bounding box of this, it will not align with the UV mesh as you can see. So this fails. So we do another check based on topology. And this one aligns better. So we switch by ratio. Since this one is kind of square, we keep this island. But we also switch by length in here which will not will keep the same matrix because the length of the the UV of the aperture boot as you can see. Let me show you. As you can see the aperture boot here is pretty much non-existent because this is a flat geometry. So uh let me press H. So this is a flat geometry. So we don't have really a gradient on the Y because this is completely flat on the Y. So in here we just do another check to switch by length. So basically where is that? Um input one. So in here I have an attribute called is flat where I'm just measuring the length of the attribute and then I save it as an attribute of course and then I can switch between the two the two matrix matrices. Then as I uh as I told you I'm just I'm just switching um I'm just rotating the UVs in here. As you can see the top the matrix by topology in here it will work better as you can see. Then it's simple. We get rid of all of these and we're doing this in a loop or in this case not the wrangles because I can iterate over each island using these numbers and the same in year by point and by points and uh in here we actually need a loop because the Python soft by default doesn't iterate over points or primitives or any of that. It's just a single iteration. So I think it's better to do a for loop in here instead of doing a for loop inside because Python is a bit slower than vex and in the end we get something like this as you can see. So we go from these uh scrambled UVs to these oriented UVs. Then we fuse with a small uh snap distance and we match the attribute class that we saved above. And then we delete all the attributes we created because this is an HDA and all the groups. And that's basically our HDA. No parameters in this case. uh you could probably create some to do some checks but in this case I decided to have uh pretty automatic uh uh HDA so it doesn't require user input and we can iterate over each set of geometry and as you can see this will even orient so if I connect this in here to my previous attempts this will just orient to world position world left but this one it will actually orient along the the the mesh direction as you can see. So this one is much better than my previous attempt. And there's actually a extreme case, not this one. This one I think I've showed you before. This one. And as you can see, this will orient properly even in these extreme cases. And it's not so slow. As you can see, I can actually switch between four and five and takes a second. But again, Python is not the fastest option. But that oriented bounding box function in Python is really, really good and it works pretty well. So yeah, guys, that's basically it. You can grab the this file on my Patreon and also alongside with the HDA, I'm going to release it for free for all the Patreon supporters that have access to files. And I uh you can actually rebuild these on on your own. There's nothing stopping you from doing that. But again, if you want to grab it, you can do so on my Patreon. As you can see, it's nothing too complicated, but involves a bit of work and experimentation to have this uh clean HDA. So, yeah, guys, thank you for watching. Um, I hope you you found this somewhat uh useful. And again, you can grab exclusive tutorials on my Patreon alongside with all the project files. And let me know your comments below. I would love to hear your your opinions and how you tackle these kind of situations. Thank you and I'll see you next time.



---

## Captured Frames

- [1:00] tutorials/frames/orient-uvs-like-a-pro-in-houdini-21/frame_000.jpg
- [4:20] tutorials/frames/orient-uvs-like-a-pro-in-houdini-21/frame_001.jpg
- [7:00] tutorials/frames/orient-uvs-like-a-pro-in-houdini-21/frame_002.jpg
- [10:00] tutorials/frames/orient-uvs-like-a-pro-in-houdini-21/frame_003.jpg
- [12:30] tutorials/frames/orient-uvs-like-a-pro-in-houdini-21/frame_004.jpg
- [15:00] tutorials/frames/orient-uvs-like-a-pro-in-houdini-21/frame_005.jpg
- [18:20] tutorials/frames/orient-uvs-like-a-pro-in-houdini-21/frame_006.jpg
- [21:40] tutorials/frames/orient-uvs-like-a-pro-in-houdini-21/frame_007.jpg

---

## Structured Notes

### Core Technique
A no-parameter HDA that automatically re-orients scrambled/rotated UV islands upright, using a per-island oriented bounding box computed in Python (`hou.hmath`-style `orientedBoundingRect`) combined with several VEX-based fallback checks (square-ratio, flat/no-gradient, topology-based) to handle cases where the bounding box alone gives the wrong result.

### Summary
Building on an earlier, simpler "Orient UVs Up" tool that failed on many real-world meshes, this HDA reliably auto-orients any set of UV islands right-side-up regardless of scramble. It works by giving every island a unique ID (via UV-seam split + boundary group + connectivity, since plain UV connectivity can merge overlapping islands), computing a `position.y` gradient in UV space per island to know "which way is up," calculating each island's oriented bounding box via a Python node using Houdini's `orientedBoundingRect()` function, and rotating the UVs by the inverse of that box's orientation around the pivot. Several checks are layered on top — an "is-square" ratio check, a topology-based bounding-box alternative (near-point + make-transform), and a flatness check — because bounding boxes alone fail on nearly-square or flat islands with no meaningful UV gradient.

### Key Steps
1. Give every UV island a unique ID: split the geometry on UV seams, group the split boundaries, run **Connectivity** using that boundary group — necessary because plain UV-space connectivity merges islands that happen to overlap in UV space.
2. Fix mirrored/reversed islands: unwrap the geometry in place, compute each island's centroid and prim normal on the *unwrapped* UV geometry, then use a dihedral rotation (vector-to-vector rotate) to flip any island whose normal faces the wrong way so all islands face consistently positive Z in UV space.
3. Determine "up" direction per island: promote the island ID to points, measure the **gradient of `position.y` in UV space** (not world space) per island — this produces a vector in UV space pointing toward wherever the mesh's actual "up" direction is on that island.
4. Isolate a single island for the demo/debug loop (Blast by island ID) and promote a `max` island-count detail attribute to drive a for-loop over every island.
5. Build a per-island oriented bounding box via a **Python node**: swap the UVs into the position attribute (texture → P) so the geometry lives in UV space, then call Houdini's `orientedBoundingRect()` function (fed a list of point positions gathered manually since Python SOPs don't auto-iterate) to get an oriented center, a 2x2 orientation matrix, and a size — converted to a 3x3/4x4 matrix (`hou.Matrix3`) and stored as point attributes (`rot`, `square` flag for near-square ratios).
6. Rotate the UVs in place using the inverted oriented-bounding-box matrix, subtracting the pivot first and re-adding it after so islands rotate around their own center rather than translating.
7. Add a topology-based fallback matrix: for each island, find a bounding-box center point and a near point, build a second orientation matrix via **Make Transform** from that pair plus the up-vector — used instead of the OBB matrix when the OBB check fails (e.g., near-square islands).
8. Add axis-correction logic: since the OBB Y-axis doesn't necessarily match the UV-space "up" gradient measured in step 3, iterate over the 3 candidate axes of the rotation matrix in a small loop, dot-product each against the measured gradient direction, and rebuild the matrix using whichever axis best aligns — so the final Y-axis of the matrix always points toward the mesh's real "up."
9. Add a flatness fallback: for islands with (near) zero `position.y` gradient (i.e., fully flat mesh sections with no meaningful "up" direction), measure the gradient vector length, store an `is_flat` attribute, and switch to the topology-based matrix instead of the (meaningless) OBB-derived one for those islands.
10. Chain switches ("switch by ratio" for square islands, "switch by length" for flat islands) to pick the correct final rotation matrix per island, then rotate the UVs, wrap the whole per-island computation in a for-loop (Python doesn't auto-iterate over points/primitives like VEX wrangles do), fuse with a small snap distance, restore the original class/island attribute match, and delete all temporary attributes/groups since this is a clean, parameter-free HDA.

### Houdini Nodes / VEX / Settings
Split (by UV seams), Group (boundary), Connectivity, Attribute Swap (texture ↔ position), Attribute Promote (vertex→point, point→detail max), dihedral/vector-rotate wrangle for normal-flip correction, gradient measurement in UV space (`position.y`), Blast (isolate island for debug), custom **Python SOP** using `orientedBoundingRect()` (2D oriented bounding box function returning center/orientation-matrix/size), `hou.Matrix3`/`hou.Matrix4` construction, point creation + attribute setting from Python (`geo.createPoint()`, `point.setPosition()`, `point.setAttribValue()`), Make Transform (topology-based fallback matrix from near-point + up vector), axis-alignment for-loop (dot product per candidate matrix axis vs. measured gradient), Switch nodes (by square ratio, by flatness/length), For-Each loop (per-island iteration since Python SOPs run once per cook, not per element), Fuse (small snap distance), Attribute Delete (cleanup for HDA packaging).

### Difficulty
Advanced (combines VEX, a custom Python SOP calling Houdini's geometric utility functions, and multiple matrix-based fallback/correction passes).

### Houdini Version
21 (title and UI).

### Tags
uvs, python, hda, matrices, oriented-bounding-box, vex, dihedral, procedural-uvs

---

## Related Tutorials
- [Houdini Tips - Procedural UVs, Channel Packing and More](houdini-tips---procedural-uvs-channel-packing-and-more.md) — related UV-space manipulation techniques from the same channel.
- [Procedural UVs - UV Layout Node in Depth](procedural-uvs---uv-layout-node-in-depth.md) — companion UV-tooling video covering island packing/distribution, a natural next step after auto-orienting islands with this HDA.
