---
title: VOPS 02 - Random & Noise - Houdini Beginner Tutorial
source: YouTube
url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mORz1y05T7E
author: Voxyde VFX
ingested: 2026-06-23
houdini_version: "[PENDING]"
tags: []
extraction_status: pending
frames_dir: tutorials/frames/vops-02---random-noise---houdini-beginner-tutorial/
frame_count: 6
---

# VOPS 02 - Random & Noise - Houdini Beginner Tutorial

**Source:** [YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mORz1y05T7E)
**Author:** Voxyde VFX
**Duration:** 45m51s | 6 section(s)

---

## Raw Data (for Claude Code extraction)


### Random & Gaussian Random [0:00]
**Transcript:** Welcome to Intro to Vops Part 2, Random and Noise.  In almost any kind of VFX shot, we will need variation in the way the simulation behaves.  This is achieved through adding noise and randomness to various attributes.  Now we can go over a very important node which is going to be the random node.  So I have a simple setup here, basically we have a grid, which has quite a few subdivisions  and then I have a sphere.  Then we are using this switch node so we can easily switch between these two types of  geometries.  So we can see how the random will affect different types of geometry.  Then we have a scatter, so at any point I can turn this on and off by using Q.  So we can either see how this works on geometry or we can see how it works on just simple  points.  And then finally we also have a color, just so we don't have the black points.  And also I will press D in my viewport and let's go to background and I will just change  the color scheme here to dark.  So we can see this a little bit better.  So we will go ahead and drop an attribute of op and let's dive inside.  So the random is actually a very simple node.  If I drop this, we can see that we have this pause input over here and the random output.  So this pause is basically the seed.  So if I promote this to a constant and we can use any value here, if I want to see what  the output will be here, let's do a bind export.  And we will just export this to a attribute called test.  And if I go in the geometry spreadsheet, we can see now that this is going to be the  test values.  And if I change this constant here, we can see that we still get the same value and this  is because we are using the same constant value for each point.  So this is why we are not getting a random value per point.  So if, for example, I were to plug the position inside this pause, now we are starting to get  random values.  We can see that this all will range from 0, from almost 0 to a value of almost 1.  So this is what the default range for this random output will be here.  So since the position is different for all of our points, this is why we will get a random  value for each point.  Now even though it says pause here and this is a vector input, the most common use case  of this random is going to be in combination with the pt num.  So the point number.  So if I plug this inside the pause, we can see now that this changes actually the signature  and it's switched to this blue value, which is now an integer.  And now this pause input here became an integer.  And we can see if I plug the position back in here, we also get a different signature  with different options here.  But like I said, most commonly the random you will use in combination with this pt num.  So let's plug this here.  And now the signature became 1D integer input, which it is and 1D output.  So aside from float values, and let's go back here, we can also change this to give us  a random 3D vector.  So if I switch this to a 3D vector output, we can see now that the test became a vector  that has random values on all of the components that range from 0 to 1.  So this is also a good way to get random vectors.  And we can go ahead also in the scene view and since this is a vector, I will just output  this 3D vector as our normal.  So now I can turn on the normal display here and we can also preview this 3D vector.  And we can see that this does give us in fact a random vector, but they're all kind of  pointing outwards.  And especially if I look in a front view, here we can see that these are all of the vectors  and they are all pointing upwards and also a little bit on the Z direction.  So they are all a little bit skewed.  So they're not completely random.  And this is because when it comes to vectors in order to get a complete random vector,  we also have to use the negative value.  So some of these directions will also need to push in negative values.  So if I go to the geometry spreadsheet and let's maybe just disable, let's not export  our test attribute and just look at our normals.  If I just isolate one component, we can see that all of these ranges will go from 0 to  1.  So we actually need them to go from negative 1 to 1.  So back in my scene view, I can do a fit range over here.  And by default, this will now turn into a 3D signature fit range.  So our source min and our source max ranges are from 0 to 1.  And we need to remap these to negative 1 and 1.  So on this destination min, I will just go ahead and drag this down until we get a minus  1 on all of our components here.  And now we can see in our viewport that we have a true random 3D vector.  So if I press space bar 1 to go in the perspective, now we actually have complete random vectors.  Now all of these have different lengths.  And normally we have to normalize the vectors.  So they have a unit length of 1.  So if I drop down a normalize, now they also have the same length.  So this is more useful for us.  But we will talk more about this normalized when we get to our vector operations.  So don't worry about that for now.  So anyway, I'll get rid of this.  So we can output a 3D vector.  We can output a 3D point, which is almost exactly like a vector.  So I don't really know what the difference is here.  I usually just use the 3D vector output.  And 3D normal as well.  We can see that if I switch this, it does the exact same things.  So I don't know why these two are here.  And finally, if we go to the 3D color, and if I remove this connection, I can plug this  in our CD.  And we can see that we have a different color for each attribute.  So sometimes this is useful.  And finally, we have this 4D output.  So we can also output a vector for attributes.  So something like a equaternion.  But we will get into this later.  The most common ones are of course going to be the 1D output and the 3D vector.  So these are the ones that we should focus on.  So these two are going to be in probably 99% of cases.  And specifically when we are working with random, we are going to use this 1D output.  And this is when we actually want to randomize a value per point.  And this comes up a lot in particle simulations.  So for example, let's go up and let's disable the scatter.  So we are working with geometry and turn of the point normal display.  Let's plug this inside the popnet.  So we are not really going to spend a lot of time talking about this.  We are just going to use the basic setup that Houdini gives us.  And if you've seen the intro to Houdini, you know that we can use the attribute VOP  to create a velocity vector.  So if I just do a simple constant here, which is going to be a tree float, and I point  this vector up, so 0, 1, and 0, and I plug this inside the velocity.  We can also preview the velocity by using this point trail display.  And if I zoom in on one of these points, we can see this is going to be our velocity  vector.  If I use this as the velocity and go up and I preview the simulation, we have this result.  So all of these now are going at the exact same speed.  And let's say that I want each point to have a different speed.  If I go back inside, we can use this random value, which is going to be from 0 to 1 to  multiply this vector with.  So if I drop a multiply after the constant and I plug the result of this random, if I reset  the simulation, now we can see that all of the points are going at a random speed.  So this is very useful, like I said, with particle simulations.  And let's go ahead and also check how this would affect a geometry version.  So I'm going to go ahead and put this pop-net to the side and let's go back to our attribute  VOP.  And we disabled the scatter, but let's go ahead and switch to our sphere geometry.  And let's go back inside here.  I'll remove all of these.  Just keep the random.  And let's do another display along normal.  And about this node, we don't actually have to plug the input position and our normal  inside the inputs over here.  Houdini will automatically recognize the inputs here and all we have to do is plug the display  P inside our P.  And now I can promote the amount to a constant and I can push the points along their  normals.  So if I grab the random value and I plug this inside the amount, all of these will be  displaced by a random value from 0 to 1.  And of course, we can now use a feed range after our random and our source min and max  are set all right.  So 0 to 1.  And now I can increase the destination max.  So I can increase the spread or I can even decrease the destination min so I can push some  of these in that are closer to a value of 0.  Let's reset these values.  And also I can play around with the source min and max.  And this is something you will do a lot when it comes to random.  So for example, I increase the source min.  We can see that we can grab a lot of these values and turn them to 0.  So if I really increase this, we have this very interesting spiky result and now I can  also play with the destination max.  So we can get some really cool results or if I were to increase the source max, I can  kind of increase the spread of our source values.  So I can make all of the spikes a little bit more uniform.  So the random again is used a lot in combination with the feed range and of course we can still  add a ramp parameter after over here and have even more control.  So very useful and this is the random.  Now there is also a different version of random which is the Gaussian random.  So if I drop down the Gaussian random, this will also take a seed so I can plug the pt  num into this.  And if I plug the results in our amount here, we have kind of the same situation.  But if I decrease this, so what the Gaussian random will do for us, it's going to give us  values that also go in the negative directions.  So it's not going to be from 0 to 1, it's going to be values around 0.  So maybe this makes a little bit more sense if I do a bind export and I do the test.  Attribute if I go inside the geometry spreadsheet, we can see that the values range from 1 to  a value of negative 1.  So this also goes over 1 or negative 1 if I increase this STD deviation value here.  So if I increase this, we can see that we are pushing these values even further and we  can see how this affects our geometry.  If I push this further, we get both negative and positive values and this value here controls  how far apart these values can be.  So if I go to the geometry spreadsheet, if I decrease this value, we can see that our  highest values will be around 0.2 and negative 0.2.  So this node is also sometimes useful.  Specifically, this node, let's go ahead and disconnect this.  This Gaussian random can also have a 3D vector signature.  So earlier when we generated the random vector with the regular random node, we had to fit  the ranges from 0 to 1 to negative 0 and 1.  And now this output will directly give us those negative values.  So we don't have to do the fit range thing anymore.  This will be a true random vector.  So if I plug this in my test, we can see that we have these negative values as well.  And if I plug this inside our normal, let's go ahead and turn on the normal display.  Let's maybe switch back to scatter.  Now this is a little bit hard to see because we are working with low values.  So I can go to this Gaussian random and I can just increase this deviation so we can  push these values out.  And now we can see that we have a true random vector and maybe I can switch this back to  my grid.  So we can see that all of the vectors are truly random.  So this is usually what I use this Gaussian random for.  Mostly to get a true random vector, so I don't have to do the random and then the fit range  after.  I just use the Gaussian random instead.  But any other time I would probably use just a regular random.

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\vops-02---random-noise---houdini-beginner-tutorial\frame_000.jpg

### Turbulent Noise [11:49]
**Transcript:** So the random node does have its place.  But if we want something a little bit more complex and with more options and interesting  patterns, we are going to use a noise.  I'll go ahead and let's get rid of all of these.  So we have the same setup here which is going to be this grid or this sphere.  And let's go ahead, let's maybe work on our sphere for now.  So I will set the switching put to one and I'll disable the scatter, leave the color on  and we have our attribute pop.  And let's go ahead and let's do a turbulent noise.  So let's drop this here and just like the random is going to need some values from where  to generate these noise values from.  So 99.9% of the cases we are going to use the our own position.  So I'm going to plug the P into the position and by default the turbulent noise is going  to give us a signature of 1D noise.  Let's go ahead and take a look at this 1D noise and we will export this to our color.  Just so we can preview this in our viewport and maybe I'll press D and I'll set the background  back to a light value.  So we have this nice pattern and we can play around with the frequency and the amplitude  here all this is doing is basically just doing a multiply operation over the values that  we already have.  Maybe I will go up and I want to increase the resolutions here.  So let's maybe do 104 hour frequency on the sphere and we will go back.  So we also have the offset.  If you want to push the noise along any of our three dimensions so I can push this on  the X or Y or Z and this is also a very cool way to animate the noise.  So if I plug the time into a float to vector and plug this as my offset we can see that we  have this nice noise animation that's animating on one of the dimensions and I can use any  dimensions here.  So this is actually a very common thing when you want an animating noise you will probably  use the time or frame to generate this offset vector.  So let's go back to our noise settings then we have a tenuation and turbulence.  So turbulence will sort of increase the detail of our noise and we can see if I said this  to zero and start increasing the levels it sort of adds more levels to the noise but usually  I don't really mess around with turbulence.  I kind of like to live this setting as they are and if I want more detail I will usually  increase the roughness.  So if I increase the roughness we can see this will do exactly what it says it will add  more roughness to the noise so it's going to add a lot more high frequency details and  if I want a smoother result I will just set the roughness to a lower value like so.  So usually I play around with the roughness and live the turbulence as it is and if I decrease  this at an animation we can see that this kind of let us the values of our noise and in  fact if I go to this question mark icon over here so we can go to the documentation that  Houdini provides we can scroll down here and this is actually a pretty good documentation  we can see we have a lot of information on noise but if I scroll further down below  we can see we can find our at an animation so it flattens the noise to prevent extreme  spikes by damping the values higher values create this motor look.  So like I said it kind of flattens the values but I don't find myself usually adjusting  this at animation value I usually keep this at one and don't touch it and also the turbulence  I keep this at five and don't touch it and I play around with the frequency of set  amplitude and roughness.  So the noise can be many types and the default for the turbulent noise is going to be this  alligator noise which gives us values that range from zero to one and we can see the pattern  that this creates here so all of these types have pretty specific uses and you will really  get to know them once you start using them in your projects so there are quite a few  types and all of these are a little bit different as we can see but as far as turbulent noise  goes the one I find myself using the most is going to be the simplex noise so this gives  us values that range if I go in the geometry spreadsheet and check any of these components  we can see that we get something between 0.6 and a negative 0.6 so what I usually do in  order to work with ranges from zero to one which will be more useful for us is after  the turbulent noise I almost always do a fit range and we set the source mean like I said  to a value of negative 0.6 and the source max to a positive 0.6 so now in the geometry  spreadsheet we are roughly getting values between 0 and 1 so this pattern or this type  is what I usually use to break up the sources when I do simulation so mostly particle simulation  so like I said all of these types have their use cases but simplex noise will be the one  I use the most especially if I'm using the 1D noise signature and speaking of which  let's set this to a 3D signature and see what we get so I will remove this connection  and whenever we are outputting a 1D noise so a float value we are usually exporting the  value directly to our attribute so I can do a bind export and this can become something  like density in case of a smoke simulation or like I'm doing here I'm plugging it inside  the CD but when we are working with a 3D noise so I will set the signature here to a 3D  noise usually we want to add this on top of our position so let's go ahead and if I  check the result of this noise in the geometry spreadsheet we can see that we are getting  roughly the same values now if I plug this directly inside our position we are getting  exactly these values as they are here so this is not really useful for us so this is why  we usually added on top of the position that we already have so when we add this now  we can see all of these nice patterns that it creates so we still have the animation if  I scroll my timeline and if I go in the turbulent noise we still have pretty much the same  properties that we can adjust here so these are pretty self explanatory I'm not gonna  go over them again again roughness will add more detail or smooth out the noise and then  we have amplitude and frequencies so you should be already familiar with all of these and  again as far as turbulent noise is concerned even when I'm doing a 3D displacement as we  are doing here adding it to our P I will usually use the simplex noise version but sometimes  the sparse convolution noise also gives us pretty interesting result and this is mostly  used when you are trying to create a terrain or some rocky geometry so we can see what  this does for us it really creates some nice interesting patterns and it's kind of and  it kind of has a little bit more dramatic changes than the simplex noise so I would say  that the values of the simplex noise are a little bit more closer to each other whereas  if I change this to sparse convolution noise we see that we have a little bit more interesting  look with some peaks that really stand out more than the rest and we can also go up and  I will turn on the scatter so we can preview this on the points and again I will press  D and for the points I will make the background dark and maybe I will just increase this  to let's say let's do 1 million so we have enough points and also I will right click this  icon over here with the material and change the display to pixels just so we see our pattern  a little bit better so this also comes up a lot a lot of the time you will have sources in  your simulations that are just points and you want to introduce noise to those sources so  again usually I will do a turbulent noise and I'm either gonna use sparse convolution noise or  simplex noise so if I increase the amplitude here we can see that this actually creates a very  nice interesting pattern and when we combine this with animation we are really going to set up our  particle simulations to have interesting motion the main problem with turbulent noise is that we

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\vops-02---random-noise---houdini-beginner-tutorial\frame_001.jpg

### Anti Aliased Flow Noise [19:39]
**Transcript:** can only animate this noise by using this offset value here which is essentially just shifting  basically the positions over one of the x, y and z directions so no matter how we animate the  noise by using the offset we are always going to have this sort of directional movement so if I want  to evolve the noise over time we can use an anti-aliased flow noise so if I drop this let's search  for anti-aliased and let's use the flow noise version which gives us a couple of extra properties  and if I were to let's plug our p inside the position and if I were to replace our turbulent  noise we can see that we can get the same result let's also make sure that this will be a 3D  output signature so let's switch this to a 3D noise so this kind of looks the same as our  turbulent noise but now we have a couple of options here a couple of extra options which are  going to be the flow and the flow rate so I can use this flow value to animate our noise  and I can simply plug our time into this flow value and now if I look at the animation  we can see our noise is moving but it doesn't have any particular direction and now our flow rate  if I set this to a value of 2 so if I increase this the movement will sort of have a higher frequency  so we can also have larger broder movement if I set this to a lower rate so when I preview this  we can see how the flow rate will affect our movement the problem with animating the noise with  this flow value is that this is a repeating pattern so if I set the flow rate back to a value of 1  let's maybe disconnect our time if I set this flow value to 0 and check my noise and if I  set this to a value of 1 we have the exact same pattern and also when I go to a value of 2 it will  again have the same pattern and this is because we are going to repeat the animations from 0 to 1  and then from 1 to 2 from 2 to 3 and so on so it's going to be this repeating cycle so if I plug  time back into our flow to me this is pretty obvious that it's a pattern that keeps repeating  and depending on what you're doing this might be enough but the better version is going to be by  using a 4d vector instead of a regular 3d vector and when it comes to noise all this 4d vector means  is that it's simply going to take the position and it's going to add the fourth component which is  going to be the time so usually a vector with four components is going to be a quaternion but we don't  need to worry about that for now when it comes to a noise if we want to generate a 4d vector all we  have to do is add the noise to our original 3d vector so if I go to this flow noise we can see that  the signature here can either be 3d input 1d noise so it can either give us a 1d output or a 3d  output but if I were to disconnect the position so if I were to cut this wire and I go to this  signature over here we see that this also gives us now an option to input a 4d input so the vector  with four components so let's switch this to 4d input and 3d noise and now we can see we have the  four components so the first three is going to be our regular position and the fourth one is going  to be the time so to create this let's drop a vector to vector 4 and we will plug the position  inside our vector input and our time as our fourth component and now we can plug this into our  position and when I play now we will have the properly evolving noise so now we no longer have  a pattern that keeps repeating so this will give us a better result now it's important to note here  is that when we want to change the frequency so if I want to increase the noise better so get more  high frequency details and I increase the frequency this will also make our noise evolve faster  because we are also increasing the frequency of the time so our fourth component here so if I play  this and let's maybe just increase this further we have a higher frequency over the noise  but now also over the time so for example if I were to keep these three values as they are and  change our fourth value to a value of 0.2 we can now see that the noise evolves a lot slower  and if I change this to a value of 5 we will have a much higher speed so this is something to keep in  mind so I will sometimes use this noise type when I want something specific in terms of animation  and I don't want the noise to have an obvious directional movement so this is when I would use this  AA flow noise now curl noise can also have this kind of 4D vector input so I will get rid of

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\vops-02---random-noise---houdini-beginner-tutorial\frame_002.jpg

### Curl Noise [24:21]
**Transcript:** this flow noise and I will do a curl noise and I will plug the result of this vector to vector 4  inside our pause and when I do this we can see that this the inputs here switch from green to yellow  so it automatically got set to a signature 4D noise so this is also something worth knowing and I will  set the noise type here to simplex which is going to be my favorite one and I'll get rid of  this connection and let's add this and I'll actually get rid of this turbulent noise and let's  add our curl noise so this is again sort of similar to the flow noise and by having this 4D input  we can see that we also have animation so the same rules will apply here as I change the frequency  I can decrease the speed here if I set the fourth component to a lower value so we can do something  like this we can see I'm not sure how noticeable this is in the viewport let's maybe set this  to a point display if I play the animation we have these straight points that are flying around  our geometry and this is because of this step size here by default this is a very very low value  so if I just increase this a bit to maybe a value of 0.01 we can see that this actually got rid  of that flickering so so usually you have to increase this step size a little bit to ensure that  you don't have any weird artifacts so let's go back to pixel display and this curl noise is  extremely good at achieving fluid motion so this is kind of imitating how a smoke simulation  behaves so for example if I go up and I do from this color let's drop this inside a solver  and this will be the exact same thing that we did in the intro to Houdini video I will grab this  attribute VOP let's go to our solver and I will just place this inside and we will link this to  our previous frame and let's go inside and I will actually right click and choose to promote all  of the input parameters so I can edit this at the top level let's go ahead and just reduce the  amplitude so now this amplitude will accumulate over time and since this is using a 4D vector this  is also evolving the noise so if I play now and check out the animation we see that we end up with  this really nice fluid and organic motion and hopefully we can see now the application of this  curl noise so I can maybe decrease the frequency slightly and let's reset the simulation okay let's  actually we have to go up at the top level and I will pin the viewport to the sub level so let's go  back inside and let's play and I can maybe decrease the frequency even more and again we have to go  and reset the simulation so we end up with this really cool organic motion so usually when I'm  inside a popnet and I'm creating or adjusting the velocity a lot of the times I also add this curl  noise on our velocity to get this really nice organic motion so let's go back to our regular  attribute VOP and let's step back inside we can see we also have some extra options here surface  effect radius distance to surface surface normals and all of this but these have more to do with  volumes and with these settings we can get different geometry to interact with our curl noise  and we can create nice organic swirling motion that goes around the surface of any given geometry  so it comes super handy when creating velocity fields but this is something that we will discuss in  the volume chapter so for now we will only use the regular options here so more of the classic  noise properties but the curl noise is also one of my favorite types of noise and it's really good  and especially useful in simulations finally I want to talk about the whirling noise so you might

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\vops-02---random-noise---houdini-beginner-tutorial\frame_003.jpg

### Worley Noise [28:09]
**Transcript:** also find this type useful for the whirling noise let's maybe go up and I will switch this let's  leave this as a sphere but let's work on the geometry so I will turn off the scatter node let's go  back inside and let's maybe just get rid of all of these start fresh and we will drop down the  whirling noise so we have sort of the same inputs we can generate this from our position  and we have a lot of different outputs over here so if I plug this this to one value so our first  output inside the color we can preview what this noise does for us and essentially what the  whirling noise does it scatters a bunch of points all over the geometry and it computes the  distance from those points so this is why we are getting this sort of cell like pattern and we can  change the way this distance is being calculated so we have this however this is pronounced and then  we have Manhattan and then we have another one that I'm not gonna dare to pronounce but we have  these three methods to generate this distance value but more often than not probably 95% of cases  it's going to be the first one which is again I'm not gonna try to use it again I don't know  but anyway it's this one it's the first one is the default one so this is the one we usually want  now we have this distance one and if I plug distance to inside the city this is sort of the  reverse so previously we had dark points that increase the gradient to outside and now we have  the reverse where we have white values where our cells are and it's going towards a value of black  on this gradient so by itself let me let me just plug this one value inside the city by itself  this is also pretty cool and it's something that you can use to create very interesting patterns  and also a cool trick here is we can actually add a regular noise to the position from where we  generate this whirling noise so if I do a turbulent noise and I generate it from the position and I  added to the position where we generate our whirling noise so I will drop an add node here this  turbulent noise will need a signature of 3d noise and let's use for noise type sparse convolution  and I will plug the result inside this add we can see now that this turbulent noise is sort of  combined with our whirling noise so if I reduce the amplitude here maybe we can see exactly what's  happening as I increase the amplitude we are distorting the position from where these cells are  being generated and as a result it has this nice combination with the whirling noise so this is  a little bit different than if I were to generate I'm just gonna duplicate this and if I were to  generate a 1d noise and since this is a float value I can do a multiplication here I will disable  my add noise for the 3d turbulence and this is just to show you that if I were to multiply this  directly on our output of distance 1 we are not getting really the same result even if I do a  feed range here and I fit this from 0 to 1 we are simply doing a multiplication so this would be  sort of like how we would do it in Photoshop if I were to add a turbulent noise over our pattern  this is pretty much what happens but let's get rid of this when I distort the actual 3d position  from where the whirling noise is generated we have this very natural forming pattern that's a  combination between whirling and turbulence and of course this doesn't have to be a turbulent  noise here we can still use any noise so if I do a curl noise this would be by default 3d  signature and add it to my position we can see we have a different result entirely so if I start  to increase this we can really start to experiment and there are really a ton of ways that you can  get a lot of different patterns so this is just to give you an idea let's maybe undo this and use  the regular turbulent noise here so we can use this to output a flowed value but of course we can  use this as well to modify the position but if I were to apply the result of this distance 1 if I  were to add this the same way that we add our turbulent noise let me maybe get rid of this cd  connection if I plug this this one here with a simple add operation we have a pretty cool result  but we can see that all of the values are skewed in a certain direction and this is because we are  outputting flowed values so we are essentially having the same value on all of the components of  the vector so this is why we are getting this result and a better way to apply this in a 3d  position let's get rid of this we are going to use this place along normal and we will use this  as our amount so if I plug this this place p in our p now we sort of have a uniform distortion so  this would be kind of the result that we are expecting and I can play around with the settings  and this operations that I did here this is the basis for a very cool rock formation that you can  do so maybe if I decrease the frequency and I increase the scale of our displacement we can see  that this already starts to look like a rock and I can go to my turbulence and make some further  modifications here maybe reduce the amplitude so we can see that this already looks kind of like a  rock then we have different combination of the this one and these two values so for example if I  do a subtract I can subtract these two values to get a different pattern so we get something like  this which is also pretty interesting and I can reverse the order of operation here so this  matters when we are dealing with subtractions if I press shift R to reverse to reverse the order  we see that we kind of get the inverted result of what we had previously so this is also we can see  this is a very cool pattern that can be the basis for a rocky texture and then also we could simply  layer a bunch of these noises so if I hold out to duplicate this I would be able to add this  just the simple distance on top of what we have and if I do a multiply constant on our second  whirling noise I would be able to control this individually and hopefully this gives you an idea  of how this whirling noise is useful all right so this is for geometry let's maybe switch to points  so I will turn on the scatter and this will no longer work since our scatter by default doesn't  have any normals but it doesn't matter because let's go ahead and get rid of all of these I want to  show you one final thing let's do another whirling noise we also have this seed so those cell  points that we scatter to generate the distances so this is basically what this one two and three  this is why they are they are called this it's because it's referring to distance so all of the  points that we scatter to compute these distances will have a seed so if I plug this in the  CD as it is we get a weird result and this is because if I do a bind export and I export this to  a value and I will just name this seed we can go in the geometry spreadsheet and we can see that by  default these seed values will be really super high values so we are working with like hundreds of  millions so this isn't really that useful for us in this format but what we can do is we can  actually since this is different per cluster of points we can use this as a seed to generate a  random value so what I can do is I can plug the seed inside a random and now if I plug the random  inside the CD we have these nice clusters that we can use to drive all types of different effects  and maybe this will be more noticeable if I just applied to the geometry and maybe I can even  increase the frequency even further maybe let's try 200 okay so basically the point that the  worldly noise scatters will be right in the center of these points and then based on what point  is nearest to that scattered point it's going to be assigned a seed later I will actually show you  how we can do the scatter ourselves and compute this distance it's very simple but it will  come in a different chapter in this VOP series but anyway I can still go back here and I can still  even apply a turbulent noise to this of course this needs to be a 3D noise and let's use  parts convolution we could use simplex as well and it would work so let's plug this here and maybe  I can reduce the amplitude and we can create a more organic pattern like this increase the  frequency and the roughness and this clustering is super useful for example when you are dealing  with constraints so if you are doing an explosion over some geometry and you want some of the pieces  to stick together in a certain formation like this we can use this seed value to generate these  clusters on the constraints or we could even use this if I plug this in a display along normal  this even this will work and it will give us a pretty interesting result let's go ahead and plug  this in the VOP okay so we have this result and I can adjust this further and we can go back to our  our worldly noise and do some of the interesting patterns so we can generate kind of like this  cracky surface with this worldly noise if I go up and I switch this to my grid maybe we can see  this better here and of course I can increase the subdivisions so this seed value can also be used  when you are creating rocket textures and terrain so hopefully you can see how this is useful  and some different cases of where you would want to use the worldly noise now there are more noises  and more types that I can go over and maybe I will make a separate video dedicated to those  but usually these are the ones that you will use on a daily basis especially the turbulent  noise and the curl noise I use those almost every day and then sometimes worldly and AA flow  noise so this is why I wanted to cover these four types and give you an idea of what each one can do

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\vops-02---random-noise---houdini-beginner-tutorial\frame_004.jpg

### Relative Bounding Box [38:37]
**Transcript:** the next node that I want to introduce is going to be the relative to bound in box node  and this isn't directly related to the random or any noise function but I didn't know exactly  which category I should put this so I might as well talk about this here this is one of my  all-time favorite nodes and let's just do another attribute verb so we can start fresh and I will  just point this scatter here so let's remember that we are either working with a grid or a sphere  and we have the option to turn the geometry into points so let's go to our attribute verb and let's  work with just geometry for now so I will turn off the scatter and inside here we can drop the  relative to bound in box so what this node essentially does is it's drawing a bound in box around  any object that we have and it's returning the x, y and z value so if I go up let's maybe do  another type of geometry let's drop a rubber toy test geometry and let's look at this instead  so if I plug this into a bound stop I can template the result of this by pressing E so this is the  bound in box that it draws over our geometry so the relative to bound in box node is going to return  these dimensions and it's going to map all of the x's to values that range from 0 to 1 so if we  look in a side view in any of the side views this will be the z size so no matter what values  the position of the geometry has it's going to map those values as we did earlier's examples when  we split the position vector and we grab one of the components and then we used a feet to  remap value so in this case if we are splitting the position vector and we are grabbing the z  component we would have to use a feet range that goes from 1 to negative 1 and we would remap those  to 0 and 1 so the bound in box automatically does this for us and no matter what geometry we are  working with so we can see that even if I were to scale up our rubber toy we would still get  this bound in box that fits our geometry precisely and we would have values that range from 0 to 1  on all of the three components so no matter how tall this is or how wide the geometry is we are  going to have 0 to 1 on the y and 0 to 1 on the z and for the x component as well so when I go  back to this attribute verb that's working on the sphere and let's untaim plate the bound let's  step inside so we want to generate this from our position and for the file we can either point this  to open put 1 which is ourselves or if you want we can set the input here to be first input so now  we no longer need this connection so this will output all of the three vectors at the same time and  we can even preview this if I plug this inside the city we can see that we get a gradient in all of  the directions at the same time now this isn't particularly useful to us what we usually do with  the relative to bound in box is we are splitting the vector so if I remove this connection let's do  a vector to float so we can split all the components and for example now if I plug the second  component here which is our y dimension in the city we have this value that goes from 0 that's  all the way at the bottom over to 1 all the way at the top so this is super useful like I said because  we we are going to have this result no matter what geometry we input or how we change it so even if  I were to animate some of these values here the relative to bound in box will always fit the values  from 0 to 1 so this is extremely useful let's maybe set this back to a 0.5 radius so after we decide  which component we want to use we can then use a feet range to further control this so if I drop  a feet range I can control the source mean and the source max to sort of squeeze this gradient  together and get a sharper contrast and I would be able to also plug a ramp parameter after so  let's go ahead and set this to a spline ramp and I will go up so we can edit the ramp and I will  reset this so now I can do further modifications to our ramp here and let's maybe grab all of these  handles by holding down shift and let's set the interpolation to B spline so we get this  mood result and I'll press D maybe and change the background back to light so we can see this  gradient better so if I go back inside we can create some really cool controls here if I were to  promote the source mean and the source max as well and also I can offset these values if I simply add  to the second component here so after we split the vector if I drop down an add here and I promote  a second input to a constant I can rename this to offset and this is something I do all the time  in order to create a attribute that travels the geometry so if I go up and I go to this offset  if I decrease this value or increase we can see how our values go across the geometry so this is  very useful when we are doing attribute propagation and it has a lot of use cases and also now I would be  able to go to this ramp as well and if I make the last handle here if I turn this to zero as well  we are left with just this stripe over here and maybe I can adjust the ramp a little bit and  if I play around with the offset we have this cool result so this could be sort of like a trigger  for all of the points if we were doing a particle simulation and we would still be able to adjust  the minimum and maximum ranges here so we really have a lot of control and let's maybe squeeze  this back together and let's remove this handle and I'll reset this to the original look that we had  so maybe I'll get rid of some of these handles and by the way you can remove any of these handles if  you just hold down click and drag it down so if I go back inside I can use any of our components  here so if I want I could use the direction on the X or the direction on the Z and if we would  have the same result and also we can add some noise to the position from where we get our  bounding box so the same way that we did with the worldly noise let's do a turbulent noise but  really you can use any type of noise as long as it has a 3D signature output so now I will  generate this from this position and I will just add this on top before we plug it in our relative  to bounding box node so I will add this here and we can see how easily we can also introduce some  noise into this gradient so if I play around with the frequency or I change the type and I can  even increase the amplitude if I want more noise overall and play around with all of the settings  that we are familiar with now and we can really get some cool and super fast results as we can see  so now if I play around with the offset we can see how easily we can create this growth animation  so super useful node relative to bounding box I use this almost every day and this is why I wanted  to show this early on.

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\vops-02---random-noise---houdini-beginner-tutorial\frame_005.jpg


---

## Structured Notes

### Core Technique
[PENDING EXTRACTION]

### Summary
[PENDING EXTRACTION]

### Key Steps
[PENDING EXTRACTION]

### Houdini Nodes / VEX / Settings
[PENDING EXTRACTION]

### Difficulty
[PENDING EXTRACTION]

### Houdini Version
[PENDING EXTRACTION]

### Tags
[PENDING EXTRACTION]

---

## Related Tutorials
[PENDING EXTRACTION]
