---
title: VOPS 04 - Geometry Interactions - Houdini Beginner Tutorial
source: YouTube
url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qDtKmbCDn3k
author: Voxyde VFX
ingested: 2026-06-23
houdini_version: "H19+"
tags: [vops, geometry-interaction, distance, nearpoint, point-cloud, pcopen, intersect, attribute-transfer, particles, beginner-intermediate]
extraction_status: complete
frames_dir: tutorials/frames/vops-04---geometry-interactions---houdini-beginner-tutorial/
frame_count: 6
---

# VOPS 04 - Geometry Interactions - Houdini Beginner Tutorial

**Source:** [YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qDtKmbCDn3k)
**Author:** Voxyde VFX
**Duration:** 44m22s | 6 section(s)

---

## Raw Data (for Claude Code extraction)


### Distance & Import Point Attribute [0:00]
**Transcript:** We continue the VOP series with part 4, geometry interactions.  In Houdini there are several ways to use geometry for simulations.  In this part we cover what different operations do and when to use them.  In Houdini there are many ways that different geometries can talk to each other.  So we can have any geometry and we can grab attributes from other geometries  and combine different attributes like position or velocity or really any attribute.  So this will come up all the time in VFX.  So let's say for example we have a particle simulation that starts off the ground  and we want the particles to slowly form the shape of a human or any other shape.  We would have to know how to access information from that human mesh or geometry  and how to apply it in our simulation.  So I will show you some of the main ways that we can achieve this interaction between geometries  and the differences between them.  So I will start with a Geocontainer and I will just drop a grid and maybe just scatter some points  and I will increase the total count.  And we will plug this inside an attribute VOP.  So let's step inside and probably the simplest way to grab attributes from a different geometry  is going to be with an import point attribute.  So let's drop this node and we are already familiar with this node.  We've seen this used a bunch of times but let's just do a quick recap.  So this will ask us for a file which is going to be the input from outside of our attribute VOP.  So if I step outside it's going to be one of these other inputs here  and while we are here we can do an add and let's just create a simple point at origin  and I will place this as the second input.  So now I can go inside and we can point the OP input to our file.  We could also just use the input mode here and set this to second input  and we will no longer need a connection but let's just leave this as a file with the wire.  And then it's going to ask for what attribute we want to import so we can type this here  whether it's a position so P or N or V.  So let's just keep this as position and then the Pt number.  So if I go outside because we are only working with one point  this is always going to have a point number of zeros.  So I can turn on the point display and we can see that this is zero over here.  So let's go back to our geometry and I can just promote this to a constant  which by default is zero so this will now point to the correct point in our geometry  so the only point really.  So in the vector lessons we use this point position to create a vector that points from the geo to this point  by subtracting the vectors and I want to introduce you to a new node  which is one of my favorites and that is that distance node.  So let's drop down a distance.  Now this is very straightforward.  It will output a float value which is basically the distance between two positions.  So in our case we are going to use the position of each point.  And for the second one we are going to reference our position from the second geometry  so our single point that is in the center of the scene.  So now if I plug this result in our color so we can visualize this value.  We have this small gradient here from black to white right in the center.  And what we can do here is I can drop down a feet range and I can increase the source max  and this will help to spread out this gradient.  So as I start to increase this we can see that the gradient spreads out  and I will reverse the destination mean and max.  So let's set this to one and this to zero and now if I decrease the source max  hopefully we can see more clearly the result that we will have here.  So now basically I can just go up, grab my point and this distance will follow the center of our point.  Or actually just the point because it's only one point so it's always going to be the center.  So I can move this around and we can compute this gradient from any place  and I can go back inside and adjust our feet max to spread out the gradient.  So this is already pretty handy.  A lot of times when I had to make a simulation I wanted the density to be higher in the center.  So let me just go ahead and reset the position.  So I wanted the density to be to have a higher value in the center and fade out towards the edges.  So this is really helpful.  And we can also use a ramp parameter after our feet.  And if I set this to a spline ramp and go up I can add a point here in the middle  and we can even create this sort of like border.  So I can adjust this values a little bit and we can have something like this.  So if I'm doing a fire simulation we can turn these points into the source  and the fire would be right on this border.  And we can still go back inside and combine this with a turbulent noise.  So if I go to the position from where we get the distance or from the position of each point  I can mess up that position by using a turbulent noise.  And I will set this to a 3D noise and let's use noise type simplex.  So if I add this to our position and I'll plug the P inside the pose  and we can now add the values on our position.  And now if I play around with the noise settings we can see we get a much more interesting source.  And I can play around with the frequency and stuff like that.  And I can also animate the offset so I would be able to add some animation to this as well.  Like so.  And this setup here I did a million times in production to create interesting sources for simulation.

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\vops-04---geometry-interactions---houdini-beginner-tutorial\frame_000.jpg

### Nearpoint [5:30]
**Transcript:** So this import point attribute is working fine when we are dealing with just one point.  So we can actually manually point it to the point number, to the correct point number  by doing a constant here and setting it to zero.  But what happens if we have multiple points that we want to interact with our geometry?  So if I go up, let's go ahead and delete this node.  And let's do another scatter from the same grid.  And if I go to this result, let's maybe just scatter a few points.  Okay, so let's say that we want to use these points to generate the distance values.  So I will plug this in the second input and if I check the result,  it will only consider now the point number that has a value of zero.  So if I turn on the point number display, we can see that this one here is going to have a ptNum value of zero.  So this is the one where we generate our distance from.  So if I preview the result, we can see that it's this one over here.  But let's say that we want to consider all of the points.  So let's maybe template our second input.  So our second scatter, we can now use a near point function to determine  based on our position, which of these points, so from our second scatter,  which of these points is closest to our own position.  So if I go back inside and I drop a near point node,  we will point the position to our own position.  So I will place this here and the input will be the second input.  So we want to look in our second scatters.  So all of these white points over here.  So now this will give me the point that is closest to each of our other points.  So maybe this is a little hard to see with the black background.  Let's press D and set the background to light.  Alright, so now each of these black points will look in our second input.  So again, it will be this scatter over here.  And maybe I can even turn on the point size for all of these points and make them bigger.  So from our scatter, we are going to look for each point in our second input.  And based on our position, we will be able to identify which of these points  is closest to us. So if I go back inside, this will return the point number.  So I can plug this in our PtNum.  So now this will be the result.  And let's maybe go back to a dark background.  So if I grab this feed value now and adjust the source max.  And let's maybe go up and also reset our ramp just so we get the normal 0 to 1 value.  We can now adjust our source max.  And we can see what this is doing for us.  It's going to grab the nearest point from our second input.  And it's going to generate the distance from that point.  So this is how we can have multiple points as our second input.  And I can increase the total count here.  And we can see we get this really nice and interesting pattern.  So I can play with our feed ranges further.  And I can also do the same thing that we did with the ramp.  So I can also create this and create sort of like the same thing we did that gives us a border.  And maybe I will just get our more points.  And we can also go to our noise and we can play with the amplitude.  So this is one way that we can use the near point function.  So we usually have to combine the near point with this import point attribute.  In order to retrieve the attribute that we are actually looking for from the second geometry.  Because this only outputs the point number.  So by itself like this it's pretty much useless to us.

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\vops-04---geometry-interactions---houdini-beginner-tutorial\frame_001.jpg

### Find Attribute Value [8:56]
**Transcript:** So this import point attribute is very useful.  And we can see that we can combine it with different nodes in order to retrieve the point number that we are interested in.  We can of course use it on the same geometry that is modified in some sort of way.  So I'll go ahead and let's get rid of all of these.  Let's actually go up to our scatter.  And I'll get rid of our second scatter here.  Maybe I'll just delete this attribute.  So let's say that this geometry for whatever reason we needed to go through a different process in order to create a attribute or to modify the position.  So let's say that on the right I will just simply do a attribute noise vector.  And I just want to mess up the position a little bit.  So let's go to this.  I'll set the vector here to be.  And I just want to displace the points.  And maybe I'll just increase the element size.  So this is just to give you an example, but let's say that we achieve this result through some simulations or through some other different methods.  And then on our original geometry.  So on this regular scatter, let's do another attribute.  And let's say that this chain on the right.  So what we are inputting here on the left, the first input, this is the geometry that I want to end up with.  So the end result geometry.  And we want to create some separate attribute through some other process.  And then we want these geometries to talk between each other.  So I will input the result of this noise vector in our attribute.  And let's step inside.  So we can use this import point attribute.  Let's look in our second input.  So the result of the noise.  We will do another import point attribute.  And we can point the ptNAM to the ptNAM for our import point attribute.  And since the geometries are exactly the same.  So I'm not modifying the point number in any way.  And we can turn on the point number display.  And all of these point numbers on the geometry on the left will be the same point numbers for the geometry on the right.  So let's turn this display off and go inside.  And for example, now I'm grabbing the position that's on the second input.  So I can, for example, do a mix between our original position and our new position.  And if I plug the result, we can now alter the bias.  And we can update the current position to the other position from the second input.  So this is pretty cool.  Now in an ideal world, we are not changing the point number with the operations that we do on the separate chainsaw on the right.  But depending on what we are doing, we might run this other set of points through a simulation.  Or we might do any other operation.  And as a result, our point number will change.  So for example, if I do a blast node after our noise vector, let's set this to point.  And we're just gonna grab a few points here.  So I'll grab all of these press enter.  So we are deleting some of these points.  And like I said, this is just to give you an example.  This is not something you would usually do.  But it is to illustrate that you might do some operations that will mess up the point number on the second geometry.  So if I look at the point numbers for this, if I just look at any one of these points,  when we do this blast operation, we can see that these numbers change.  If we focus on this one, the numbers change.  Or we can even just do a sort node here.  So if I plug this here, I can use a different settings here.  So let's use random.  And now we have an entirely different point numbers for all of these points.  As we can see, if I turn this on and off.  So now when we go back to our attribute, this will no longer works.  As we can see, this is going to give us a completely different result.  So this is not really what we want.  So what we can do to fix this before we start branching off with our geometries.  So over here at our original scatter, and I will actually drop a null.  And let's reconnect this node.  So we create our scatter.  And after this null, we branch off in different operations.  So what we can do is we can create an attribute for each point that stores our current point number.  So I will drop a attribute of up here right after our scatter.  And I will go inside.  And I will grab the point number here and do a bind export.  And create an attribute based on this point number.  So the type will be integer because the point number is an integer type.  And let's just name this ID.  We can give this any name we want, but usually I go with ID.  So let's go up.  And now this ID will propagate down our chain.  And even if we change the geometry in any way, so no matter what I do on our first chain.  And let's maybe just drop a color here.  And let's make this another color.  So no matter what operations I do over here, and what different operations we do on the separate chain,  this ID will be the same after we do all of the operations.  So let's maybe I will use another color here.  So maybe blue.  And let's get our fewer points.  We can see this more clearly.  And I will just decrease the force total count.  So I made a visualizer for our ID.  So I will turn on this visualizer.  And here I created this ID visualizer.  That simply shows us the value of the ID for each point.  So this is similar to how this point number display works.  And I can even turn this on as well.  So we can see currently here that before we do any changes.  So right after we create this ID attribute, we are setting the ID value to be the same as our PtNum.  So all of the ID values and the PtNum values stay the same.  And now when we do some operations on the right here and we change the point number, if I go to this sort.  And let's maybe disable the attribute noise vector.  So we don't display them.  We see that we have a different point number, but the ID value is the same for the same point.  So we can go over here.  We can see that the ID matches the PtNum.  And then when I look at my sort, we have a different point number, but the same ID value.  So this will be the same in both of these chains.  Okay? No matter what I do.  So even if I distort the position or if I delete some points or resort them, our IDs will match.  So now we can use this ID value to match the point between the two geometries.  And for this we can use the node find attribute value.  So let's go inside here.  Let's drop the find attribute value node.  So a super useful node.  And let's take a look at this.  So we want to look in our second geometry.  So let's connect this here to open put to.  And we want to look for the point that has the same ID as our own current IDs.  So the ID from the first input, which is our own geometry.  So we are looking for an integer attribute.  The name is ID.  And the search value will be our own ID.  So we can do a bind.  And we can bring in this ID attribute.  So let's set the name here to ID.  And this is an integer.  And I will connect this ID result as our search value.  And let's maybe organize these nodes a little bit like so.  And now this will return the correct point number from the second geometry.  So for example, for this point over here.  And I'm not sure how well we can see this in the viewport.  But for this point, the find attribute value will look at this point.  And it will look at our ID, which is this 672 value.  It will look in the second geometry for the point that has the same ID value.  And it will return the point number of that point.  So in this case, it's going to be the point number 251.  So now we can plug this as our ptNAM.  And let's go up and let's re-enable our attribute noise.  And let's go back inside here.  So now when we look at our mix result, let's take a look.  And let's disable the displays for now.  And let's maybe increase the points as well.  So I will scatter more points.  So now let's look at our mix.  And we can see that when we play around with the bias,  we are kind of getting the correct result.  We have a set of points that are going towards the center of our scene.  And we will fix this in a second.  But we are kind of there.  And let's go up and disable this color.  Now we no longer need this.  Now this set of points that are going towards the center of the scene.  And maybe we can see this better with a pixel display.  So we can see that some points are going to the center.  And these are the points that didn't find their matching ID from the second geometry.  So if we look at our points, here we have 22,352 points.  And here because we blasted some points,  we end up with less points.  So around 20,000.  So there will be a 2000 points difference between the two geometries.  And those are the 2000 points that are converging to the center here.  Now the way this fine attribute value works is if it couldn't find a point number,  it returns a value of negative one.  So knowing this, we can do a compare.  And we can say that if this value is equal to negative one,  so if it didn't find a point number,  we can use the bull result here to do some operations.  So I will do a if block.  And we don't have to worry about this for now.  This is just to illustrate that we do have options with the straight points  that aren't finding a matching ID.  So I will plug the condition to be our bull.  And let's say that I simply want to remove the points that don't have this matching ID.  So I will do a remove point.  And then we also have to connect our PTNAM to the PTNAM here.  So let's go ahead and grab the PTNAM and do the operation for all of the points.  And we can see if I turn this on enough, we are removing all of the points that have a...  That match our compare condition.  And if I go to the mix result now, we are just doing this on only the points that have a matching ID from the second geometry.  But we can ignore all of this for now.  All I wanted to show is how this fine attribute value function works.  So this is another super useful node.  And it's usually used in combination with import point attribute, like the near point function.  And this comes up a lot, especially when we are working with particles.  And the particles by default will have an ID.  Specifically for reasons like this, it stores an ID for each particle because when we spawn more particles,  the point numbers change from frame to frame.  But the ID remains the same.  So we can use the ID which is consistent for each frame to do certain operations.  So this is the fine attribute value.  And this here, what I'm doing by combining two different geometries, is just to give you an idea of how the fine attribute value works.

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\vops-04---geometry-interactions---houdini-beginner-tutorial\frame_002.jpg

### Minpos , XYZDist, PrimUV [20:11]
**Transcript:** Let's take a look at some other ways that geometries can interact with each other.  So I prepared a scene here we have a torus, so just a simple torus, that's a little bit above the ground.  Then we scatter some points on this torus, and then over here we have a grid.  And let's not worry about these nodes that are turned off for now.  But we plug the points of our torus in the first input in an attribute VOP and the grid will go in the second input.  So let's dive inside the attribute VOP and we can see nothing is currently happening.  And one other way that we can interact between the geometries is by using a minimum position.  So let's drop the minimum position node.  So this will return to us the closest position that each of these points can find on the second input.  So on our grid geometry, it will return the closest position on the primitive.  So if I go up real quick, we can see that our grid does have a bunch of primitives.  Now it could work with any amount of subdivisions here and we will see this in a second.  So let's go back inside.  We want our points to look at our grid.  So I will plug the input into the open put tool, which is our grid.  And from the position that we currently have, we want to find the closest position on this grid.  And if I plug the result in our P, all of our points got flattened, so they found their closest position,  where they land on this primitive.  And if I go back inside, I can maybe do a mix node so we can see this better.  So I'll plug this in the second result.  And now we can use this bias so we can see exactly the path they travel.  So from over here, from their original position, they will find the closest point where they land on this grid.  So this is working on the primitives.  And if I go up and I reduce the amount of primitives that we have, so if I reduce the rows and columns,  we can see that we get the same result.  So this is very useful for us because we are always going to have a smooth result,  no matter how many points our geometry has.  So this is the main pause, and this is very useful sometimes.  But we can see that the result here by default is going to return the position.  But let's say we have an attribute on these points, and we want to retrieve that attribute, so not necessarily the position.  So let's say that maybe we want to grab the normal attribute or the velocity.  So for this, we can use the XYZ distance.  So let's drop down on XYZ distance node.  And this, we can see that it has kind of the similar, kind of the same inputs as our minimum position.  So I will plug the pause into our P, and we will point this to our second input, so our grid.  But now we have a few more properties to play around with here.  So the distance will simply return the distance between where our points currently are,  so over here, and where they land on the geometry, so over here.  So it's going to compute this distance between each point.  So this is the distance, and this is very useful for some stuff as well.  And I will show you an example in a second, but let's move forward, and we have the primitive number.  So each of these primitives has a number, if I go to the grid and turn on the primitive number display,  it's going to return this number, so we can identify the primitive.  And let's set this to template and go back to our attribute, VOP, and disable the point display for the primitives.  And then this premium V is going to be a vector that tells us exactly where on the primitive we land.  So in Houdini, each primitive has this intrinsic UV attribute that goes from 0 to 1 for all of the primitives.  So this is different than the regular UVs that we use for texturing and materials.  If we look at just one of these primitives, so one of these squares, each of these has a separate intrinsic UV coordinate  that we can use to determine where the point land.  So we can imagine that it's something that goes from 0 over here to 1 over here, and then another 0.  So it's going to use these coordinates to find the position where our point lands.  So again, all primitives have this information, this intrinsic UV.  But long story short, this here is just a position where they land on the primitive.  So now we can use this information in a primitive node, so if I drop a primitive attribute, let's drop this here.  Now we can use this node to retrieve exactly the attribute that we want from our geometry, so from our grid.  So I will point the file to OPINPUT tool, so again our grid.  And then this will ask us for what attribute we want to retrieve.  So let's say that we want to retrieve the position, I will set the attribute here to P.  And then we have the primitive number, so this one here that we found by the width of the x, y, z, this.  I will plug this here, and then the position on the primitive. So this is the primitive UV, and I will plug this over here.  Now we have this UVW float values, and this is if we want to get extremely specific width, the position of the primitives.  But I almost never use these values, because the UV already has all of these values.  This is just in case we want separate values, but that's very rarely the case.  Alright, so now we retrieve the position where they fall on this grid.  So now if I were to replace this minimum position with our pre-movie, we should get the exact same result.  Okay, so I plug this here, and we can see that it does the exact same thing that our minimum position did.  So I can go to the mix, and this was our original position.  So again, with the x, y, z distance, and the primitive attribute, we retrieved the point where they would fall on our grid.  So if I plug this directly inside the P, we can see that this is the result.  So again, this is useful if we want to work with other attributes than the position.  So in this pre-movie, we can specify what attribute we want to grab from the second geometry.  So if I type here n, and we don't have a normal attribute, let's go first up, and I set up some nodes over here.  So let's re-enable this node and check that our grid now has a normal information on all of the points.  When we go back to this attribute, VOP, and I plug the result here in our P, but we want to update our own normals.  Not the position. So let's plug this into the normals.  And now we can see that all of the points have normals. So this is the normal that we grab from where they fall on the grid.  So I'll get rid of this mix node, and if I were to plug the minimum position into the P, so we can also visualize where they land, we can see what happens.  So again, it's going to grab this normal that we have here. It's going to grab it for each point.  And it's important to note that it's grabbing the interpolated value of the normal.  So if I go to the grid, and I just want to add a few more subdivisions here, and then we add normals to our points, I also have a node here, which I used to distort our normal vectors a little bit.  So I will enable this node, and we can see that this simply adds a noise for all of the vectors.  And for the scatter, let's just focus on a few points here. So I have a bless node, and I will enable this.  So we only work with a few set of points, as you can see, it's these points that are a part of the whole geometries.  So it's going to be more evident if we only focus on a few select points.  So when I go back in our attribute, now they fall on our grid, and it also retrieves the normal. And if I preview the result of our grid at the same time, we can see here, for example, for this point in the middle, it's actually the average between this point and this other point.  So it's always going to return to us a smooth interpolated result. So maybe I can increase the rows and columns here.  So let's do something like this, and maybe this is now even more apparent. If we look at the normals on the grid over here and over here, we can see that all of the normals on our points have this interpolation between these two vectors.  So maybe if I also play around with the offset here, let's make this even more apparent. But hopefully you get this by now.  We look at this point on the grid and this other point on the grid, and now all of our own points will have this interpolated result.  So this is a key component to having smooth movement in simulations, and when doing other operations as well.  So like I said, this premium V can return any attribute, and it returns the average between the points. So it's extremely useful, and we use this all the time.

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\vops-04---geometry-interactions---houdini-beginner-tutorial\frame_003.jpg

### Intersect [28:30]
**Transcript:** So the minimum position and XYZDist combined with the primitive attribute are very useful when we are trying to communicate with a geometry that has primitives.  And I pretty much use them in maybe 95% of the time, but they have some shortcomings, and I want to demonstrate this.  We have the same setup with a torus on which we scatter points, and to the left we have the same grid, so just a flat grid, and let's go inside our attribute VOP, and we are using the minimum position.  So in the mix node here, if I change the bias, we can see exactly where they land on our grid.  So this is working fine because we are dealing with a flat surface, so we get a pretty consistent result.  We kind of retain the shape of our torus. But let's see what happens if we modify our grid.  So I will go to this grid, and I will enable this edit node, where I grab a few points, and I just move them up a little bit.  So if I go to the result of the minimum position now, we have a very weird result, and if I go inside and change the bias, we can see exactly what's happening here.  As I decrease the bias and go back to our original position, we can see, and maybe it's worth if I template our geometry, we can see that from our original position, most of these points will be closer to this part of our geometry.  So we no longer get this flat result where they just fall down, because the points are simply closer to this part of the geometry, and as I increase the bias, we can see that some of these points are actually closer to this part of the geometry rather than this.  But we can see the problem that we have by using the minimum position, and this will be the same for XYZDIST as well.  So let's say that we want to specify where exactly we want to look in our second geometry, so on this grid geometry.  For this we can use an intersect node. So if I drop an intersect node, this is exactly how the ray sub works, if we are familiar with the tool at the sub level.  But this intersect node, I can point this to our grid geometry. So open put to will be our file that we want to look in, and now we have a ray origin and a ray direction.  So we are going to cast a ray from the position of our points, and we can specify the direction where we want to look in our second geometry.  And if I go up, I have a simple setup here with copy to points to demonstrate this.  So if I template this result, and let's look at our scatter without doing any modification.  So these are the original positions of our points. This is the ray that will intersect with our geometry. So we specify the position exactly where we want to look in our geometries.  So I can also template the result of the edit as well. And this is getting a little messy, but hopefully we can see.  And if I go to my line here, I can adjust the length so we can see this clearly. So we are casting a ray.  And this is the direction which we specify here. So this has a zero negative one and zero. So a vector that points completely down.  And as I increase the length, we have to increase this until we intersect with our geometry. So we have to make sure that this is a big enough vector.  So the length of the vector is big enough that it intersects the geometry. So this is all we are doing with the intersect node.  And let's go ahead and untapele it all of these. So if I go back inside the ray origin will be the position of our points.  And then the ray direction, we are just going to set directly here. And like I mentioned, we are going to give this a vector that points down.  So let's do a negative one on the ray direction and zero.  Okay, so zero negative one and zero vector that points down. And now I can retrieve the position where this would fall on the geometry.  Or we can even use the same thing as we did with the xyz distance. We can plug this in a primitive attribute.  So if I drop a primitive attribute, so the prime number will go in the prime number and the UVW in the UV.  And we have to point the file at our open put to so our grid. And then we can specify what attribute we want.  So our position. And if I plug this and update our own position, we can see the result. And this is actually not giving us the result we want.  We are getting an error here. So this is why all of the points now are at zero. And this is because in our intersect node, even though we specify the direction which we want.  So zero negative one and zero. This direction isn't big enough to intersect our geometry.  So we can see actually if I were to grab this middle value and I were to decrease this value and I start decreasing this.  Slowly our points are actually going to find the geometry. So let's just decrease this until all of our points and found the geometry.  So we no longer have a point here. So we can see that we are reaching a value roughly of negative five.  And if I go up and I template the scatter, we can preview where our points started. And if I go in a orthographic view. So our right view, we can see that the difference between this and our geometry is roughly five units.  So we can see there's a five here. And we need our raised reach all the way up to this value here. So the ray has to be big enough in order to reach the geometry.  So let's go back inside. So usually with this ray direction vector, once we decide on a vector. So let's say that I want them to point completely straight down.  So I said this to negative one. I usually just multiply this value. So I add a bunch of zeros here to make sure that the vector is big enough so it intersects any kind of geometry.  So now we have the correct result and we can plug this into the mix to see exactly how they travel. So they go from the original position.  They go straight down until they find the position on the geometry. So going back to the regular perspective view. If I template our geometry, we can see where this would land.  Now of course, since we are using the premium V here, we can grab we could retrieve the normal attribute or whatever attribute we want.  And it would interpolate the result just like the xyz distance. So this intersect is very useful when we want to interact with our geometry, but we want to specify a exact direction from where we want to grab the attributes.  Now like I said, most of the time it's either going to be mean pause or xyz dist, but I didn't counter some specific situations where the intersection proved to be very useful.

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\vops-04---geometry-interactions---houdini-beginner-tutorial\frame_004.jpg

### PCOpen & PCFilter [34:55]
**Transcript:** So minimum position xyz dist and intersect are all fine when we are dealing with geometry that has primitives, but what happens when we want to interact with a geometry that only has points.  So again, we have on the left here a torus and we scatter some points onto this torus and we have the same grid, but instead of dealing with primitives, let's only deal with points.  So let's scatter some points and work with this. So earlier we used a near point function to find which of these points are closest to our geometry.  So if I template this, probably we can see this better in this attribute box. So I already set up the near point function that we created earlier.  So if I go inside, we are grabbing the nearest point from our second geometry and grabbing the position from the points. And in this mix, now we can see that if I increase the blend, all of the points are going to find their nearest point from the second geometry and they're all going to move to that position like so.  So if I wanted to have a more consistent result and get more of the original torus shape, I would have to go up and I would have to scatter more points.  So we would have more information for our position. So if for the second input here, for the second scatter, I scatter more points so I can increase this.  Now we have a bunch of points as we can see. And if I go back here, when I play around with the bias, we can see that we can get the same result that we got with our other operations. So we're as if this intersect and all of those when we were dealing with primitives.  Now a lot of times you won't actually have this option to just create more points and fill the gaps in between.  So let's go back to just having a few points. So let's go back to our result. Now there is a way that we can still get an interpolated result.  So it's move transition between the points where they are and the points on the second geometry. If we open a point cloud and we retrieve some attributes, so we can use a PC open for this.  So let's actually keep this attribute verb with the near point and in fact, I will rename this to near point and let's create our PC open in a separate attribute so we can compare.  So I will plug this this scatter in our first input and our second points in the second input here. And let's rename this to PC open and let's step inside and let's drop a PC open node.  So if I drop this node, we can see that we have a bunch of inputs over here. Now we can point the file to our second geometry, which is the geometry that we want to look into.  So similar to how the other nodes operate as well. And then we want to specify the position from where we want to open this point cloud.  So usually this will be our own position. So the position of each point where they are currently. So I will plug the P inside the P here.  And then we have some other options here, but we can leave some of these to default. The most important ones are going to be the search radius and the number of points and the normal channel query normal and conangle. These are usually fine as they are for 99% of cases.  So we only have to worry about the radius here and the number of points. So when I increase a radius, we can imagine for each point an invisible sphere that increases.  So this is what the search radius is when I increase this, we increase that imaginary sphere. And then the number of points will tell it how many points we actually want to consider from this radius.  So I made a quick setup for this. Let's say we have just a single point here and we want to interact with these points from a scatter the geometry.  So I'll go to the end result here and preview the this invisible sphere that I was talking about. And basically this will be our radius. So we can see that as I increase the radius from this point, we start to grab some points from our second geometry. And I can increase this to add more points to this mix.  So this is what the radius will do for us in the PC open. So let's go back in this PC open. And then the number of points over here, we can specify if we want to look for more points or less points. And the result of this PC open will be an integer value.  So this PC open by itself doesn't really do a lot for us. We have to combine it with other point cloud nodes. So if I hit tab and search for PC, we can see that we really have a lot of operations that we can combine with our PC.  But probably the most useful one for us will be this point cloud filter. So I will drop this and we can see that inside this PC filter, we can specify a channel. So this is the vector that we want to retrieve from the points that we are doing operation on. And we can point out the handle to our PC open result.  So we are looking for the position here. And let's actually go up and let's preview the result of the PC open. So again, we are operating on scatter points on the torus. And the second input is going to be this geometry. So let's go back here.  And now if I were to do a mix between our current position and the result of this PC filter, let's take a look and let's plug our blend into B. If I go to the result of this PC filter.  So I said the bias to one all of our points will end up at origin 0 0 0. So this mean that our PC open couldn't find any point. And this is because the search radius isn't big enough. So if I go up our points from the torus are pretty far from our points on the grid. So let's go back to our PC open.  And we have to increase the search radius. So when I increase this, we are starting to get a different result. And let's just set the search radius to a value of five. So we know that it's big enough to actually find points on the second geometry.  And now we can also see something interesting. If I play around with this bias, we can see that the points don't really snap to other points from our second geometry. So I can also template this here. We are no longer going to an individual points.  So when I look at the result of the near point function, that's operating with the same geometries. This is the result when we do the mix. They are snapping to individual points. And when I look at my PC open, we can see that we are retaining the shape of our torus much better.  So what's happening here is that from all of the points, we are opening up this search radius. And we are looking now at more than one point to determine the position. So this PC filter is going to retrieve sort of the average between points.  So now for the PC open, the more numbers we can see there. So if I increase this number of points, the smoother result we will get. And this will become even more obvious. If we tell it to consider just one single point. So if I said this number of points to one, we are essentially getting the same result as our near points. So we are only looking at the closest points. So we can see that we get exactly the same deal.  As I start to increase the number of points, so we average more points to this result. As I start to increase this, we are considering more and more points. And as a result, we will have a smoother interpolation. So if I increase this, we can see that we reach a point so around 18 from where if we add more points, it makes no difference.  So there's no point increasing the number of points here. So when we are using this PC open and we are opening a point cloud, it's always going to be a balance between the search radius and the number of points.  Because if we introduce more points over here, this will slow down the operations. And if we increase the search radius here, this will also slow down the operation.  So usually we want to use for both of these as low values as we can to get the result that we are after. But both of these values can go really high. So we can really search for maybe a hundred or 200 points.  This also depends on how many points we are doing the operations on. So if we are opening a point cloud on 5 million points, then these values will be a lot more sensitive. So we only want to use enough radius and enough number of points to get our result.  So it's something to be careful with. But hopefully now we get an idea. It's sort of like the near point, but we are considering more points. So we are getting a smoother result. And this is very important in particle simulations, because we can see that this operation gives us a very smooth movement.  And usually we are going to use this PC open when we want a particle simulation to interact with a different geometry. Now like I mentioned, the PC open can work with many other notes. So like I said, when I type PC in our 10 menu, we have all of these.  Probably the most important one is going to be this PC filter. So we can grab the P, but we can also interpolate other attributes as well. So again, normal velocity and really any other vector. And we can also grab any kind of vector. So maybe we can grab the age of particles and we can get the average of the age.  So maybe if we have particles and if we want to retrieve the temperature, we can set this to a flow channel. And we would just have to type here temperature. So now from the second geometry that has this temperature attribute, we will be able to get that blended value of the temperature. And we will have a smooth result.  But like I said, the PC filter is going to be the most important one that we have to know.

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\vops-04---geometry-interactions---houdini-beginner-tutorial\frame_005.jpg


---

## Structured Notes

### Core Technique
VOPs deep-dive on geometry-to-geometry communication: Import Point Attribute (single point lookup), Distance (float scalar for gradients), Nearpoint (closest point from multi-point input), Find Attribute Value (ID-based matching for shuffled point numbers), Minimum Position (closest position on primitive), XYZDist + Primitive Attribute (interpolated attribute from any primitive), Intersect (ray-cast for directional queries), PCOpen + PCFilter (smooth interpolated average from point cloud).

### Summary
44m22s VOPs Part 4 by Voxyde VFX. Six sections covering all major ways geometry can communicate with geometry in Houdini:

1. **Distance & Import Point Attribute** — distance node for float gradient; import point attribute recap; turbulent noise on position for organic density source
2. **Nearpoint** — nearest point number from multi-point second input; must combine with import point attribute to retrieve actual attributes
3. **Find Attribute Value** — ID attribute pattern to handle shuffled point numbers; find attribute value searches second geometry; negative one return for missing points
4. **Minpos, XYZDist, PrimUV** — minimum position for closest point on primitive; XYZDist for distance + primitive number + UV; primitive attribute for interpolated attribute retrieval
5. **Intersect** — ray-cast direction-controlled query; fix minimum position failures on non-flat surfaces; ray must be long enough (multiply by large value)
6. **PCOpen & PCFilter** — smooth interpolation across point clouds; search radius + number of points balance; PC Filter retrieves averaged attribute; compare: nearpoint (snap) vs PCFilter (smooth)

### Key Steps

**1. Distance & Import Point Attribute**
- Add node outside VOP (single point at origin) → second input
- Inside VOP: **Import Point Attribute** (file=second input, ptnum=0, attribute=P) → position of target point
- **Distance** node: input1=P (own position), input2=imported position → float distance
- Plug distance → Fit Range → Cd for gradient visualization
- Fit Range reverse (dest min=1, max=0) → black at center, white at edges
- Add Turbulent Noise (3D, simplex) to P before distance → organic/irregular source shape
- Animate noise offset with time → animated organic gradient source for sims

**2. Nearpoint**
- Multiple points as second input (scatter from same grid)
- **Near Point** node: position=P, file=second input → returns closest point number (integer)
- Plug result into Import Point Attribute ptnum → retrieve that point's attributes
- Increase second-input scatter count for denser, more interesting pattern
- Used to find closest agent/particle from a separate set of points

**3. Find Attribute Value**
- Problem: when second geometry has reordered/deleted points, ptNum no longer matches
- **Solution: ID attribute** — before branching, add Attribute VOP → ptnum → Bind Export → integer → named "id"
- This ID persists through blasts, sorts, simulations, etc. on either branch
- **Find Attribute Value** node: file=second input, attribute type=integer, name=id, search value=own id (Bind "id")
- Returns correct ptnum in second geometry even if reordered
- Returns **−1** if no match found → use Compare (== −1) + If Block + Remove Point to handle unmatched
- Particles have built-in `id` attribute for exactly this reason (point numbers change frame-to-frame)

**4. Minimum Position, XYZDist, Primitive Attribute**
- **Minimum Position**: file=second input, P=own position → returns closest point on any primitive (smooth, subdivision-independent)
- Result: position on primitive surface; use in Mix to visualize travel path
- Works regardless of primitive count — interpolates smooth result
- **Limitation**: on non-flat/curved geometry, distance-closest ≠ directional-closest (see Intersect)
- **XYZDist**: file=second input, P=own position → returns distance (float), primitive number (int), primitiveUV (vector)
- **Primitive Attribute** node: file=second input, attribute name (P/N/V/any), plug prim number + UV → returns **interpolated** attribute value at that UV location
- Always returns smooth average — same as Minpos for position but supports any attribute
- Enable normal attribute on second geometry to retrieve interpolated normals for smooth transitions

**5. Intersect**
- **When to use**: Minimum Position fails on curved geometry (picks wrong side); need directional control
- **Intersect** node: file=second input, ray origin=P (own position), ray direction=vector → find intersection
- Ray direction: specify as {0,−1,0} for downward cast; must be **long enough** to reach geometry (multiply by 100 or 1000: `{0,-1,0}*100`)
- Returns primitive number + primitiveUV → plug into **Primitive Attribute** to get interpolated result
- Alternative: plug intersect result position directly into Mix for travel visualization
- Use case: rain hitting terrain, particles projecting onto non-flat surface from above

**6. PCOpen & PCFilter**
- **When to use**: second input has only points (no primitives); need smooth/interpolated result
- **PC Open** node: file=second input, P=own position; key parameters: **search radius** (imaginary sphere size) and **number of points** (how many from within radius to consider)
- Returns handle integer (not a point number)
- **PC Filter** node: handle from PC Open, channel=attribute name (P, N, v, temperature, etc.) → returns **averaged/interpolated** value from all points within radius
- Effect: set `max points=1` → same as near point (snaps to individual); increase to 18+ → smooth interpolation retaining original shape
- Performance: keep radius and max points as low as possible; 5M points → very sensitive; use minimum needed
- Also: PC Find (retrieve point numbers from cloud), PC Get (grab specific attribute)
- Vs Near Point: nearpoint snaps; PCFilter smoothly blends — prefer PCFilter for particle formations

### Houdini Nodes / VEX / Settings
- **Import Point Attribute** (VOP) — file=input, ptnum, attribute name; manual ptnum for single point
- **Distance** (VOP) — float scalar between two positions; combine with Fit Range + Cd
- **Near Point** (VOP) — closest point number from second geometry; combine with import point attribute
- **Find Attribute Value** (VOP) — search integer/float attribute by value; returns −1 if not found
- ID pattern: Attribute VOP → ptnum → Bind Export → integer "id" (before branching)
- **Minimum Position** (VOP) — closest position on primitive (smooth, interpolated)
- **XYZDist** (VOP) — distance + prim number + prim UV from closest primitive
- **Primitive Attribute** (VOP) — interpolated attribute at prim number + UV (any attribute name)
- **Intersect** (VOP) — ray origin + direction → prim number + UV; direction must be long (multiply by 100+)
- **PC Open** (VOP) — open point cloud; search radius + number of points parameters
- **PC Filter** (VOP) — average attribute from opened point cloud; channel = attribute name
- Particles: built-in `id` attribute stays consistent across frames (ptNum changes)

### Difficulty
Beginner–Intermediate

### Houdini Version
H19+

### Tags
[vops, geometry-interaction, distance, nearpoint, point-cloud, pcopen, intersect, attribute-transfer, particles, beginner-intermediate]

---

## Related Tutorials
- vops-03---vector-operations---houdini-beginner-tutorial.md (Part 3: vector operations)
- vops-02---random-noise---houdini-beginner-tutorial.md (Part 2: random and noise)
- tutorial-heavy-chic-part-1.md (near point / VOP binding in production context)
