---
title: Yan Paul Dubbelman | Procedural Nature | Procedural Living Plants
source: YouTube
url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xjf_mQKI3R8
author: Houdini.School
ingested: 2026-06-23
houdini_version: "H19+"
tags: [procedural-nature, plants, trees, animation, growth, curl, labs-tree-tools, mops, guide-deform, rig-wrangle, orient-along-curve, sweep, beginner-intermediate]
extraction_status: complete
frames_dir: tutorials/frames/yan-paul-dubbelman-procedural-nature-procedural-living-plants/
frame_count: 13
---

# Yan Paul Dubbelman | Procedural Nature | Procedural Living Plants

**Source:** [YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xjf_mQKI3R8)
**Author:** Houdini.School
**Duration:** 73m59s | 13 section(s)

---

## Raw Data (for Claude Code extraction)


### Meet Yan Paul [0:00]
**Transcript:** The big goal of this session is to show you how easy it can be and who do you need to build these flowers and plants and natural elements.  If you know my portfolio, you can see that it's full of flowers and plants and I'm doing a lot of trees now as well.  And using Houdini is for me the most straightforward way of getting there.  And most people when they think about Houdini they think about these simulations and a lot of coding and it's like this Houdini wall that people seem to get stuck on.  But what we're going to do today is a lot more straightforward step by step.  It should be easy enough to follow along no simulations. So you won't have to you don't you won't have to make your computer go.  Go to crazy we're just going to do pretty easy straightforward steps, but you can see how when you add these different layers of complexity, you can get to something quite natural and beautiful but also very easy to use and easy to iterate on.  And a big part of my personal Houdini journey has been figuring out how I can make tools and make effects and make a model set fit with my own artistic vision.  And for me it's very important that the software works for me and that I don't have to wrangle with a lot of technical questions before I can get to something beautiful.  And what we're going to do today is first build our model, then I'll show you what some limitations are on and generating of the model and then we're going to hack our way into something a lot more easy and flexible to use.  We're only going to use one line of code. I'll show you how to do that and also why the code works and how Houdini is working with these different elements that we're building and knows again like no simulation.  Let's see if there's anything else or the goal of this at the end is that you will be able to build your own plans and use them for both plans and trees, but also there's just some motion design effects that we can achieve with these tools.  There's only one plugin will get to it somewhere in the middle of the course, but you don't need it. I'm also going to show you a different way of building it.  You'll see that when we get there is a free plugin that I think most motion designers use. So I'm just going to get into it. If there's any questions, please put it in the chat. I don't see the chat right now, but a depth and the other moderators are monitoring and if there's any important questions or if you want to see the other model.  If you have any parts that you're stuck on, please let us know and we'll get to it once there's this breaks in between.  For now, I'm just going to get started. Okay, so the first thing that is important for this session, but also just in general, I think is the viewport itself. So by default, it's usually on this sort of bright mode.

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\yan-paul-dubbelman-procedural-nature-procedural-living-plants\frame_000.jpg

### Stems and Branches: Set-up [2:57]
**Transcript:** Today we're going to be using a lot of lines and very thin elements. So it's best to turn this into the dark mode and the way to do that is just to hover over the viewport and press D or display and then go to the background here.  I said it to dark.  Once you've done that, everything is a lot darker and easier to see. Okay, so I already created a geometry network and just dive in.  And most of my projects start with this beautiful shape that we all know is a line. I would just start with the line. Why I like using lines is because they're simple. Usually they just have two or a few points.  And but what these lines can do in who didn't use a lot more than just making simple geometry, but you can actually use them to control many other nodes and many other systems in in Houdini.  And once we're going to be using right now is the tree tools. So when you install Houdini, there's when you're installing this checkbox called labs and it's Houdini's experimental tools and there's a lot of different nodes in there that are very useful.  Sometimes they seem a bit random, but they also have a lot of very nice tree tools. So we're looking for this one, labs tree trunk generator.  First we're going to start with the base of the plant. And from now on, I'm just going to type them in quite quickly, but I'm going to go over what the name of each node is.  Yeah, and so you should be able to find it that way. From just tab and then labs tree trunk generator.  And what this allows you to do is to just use this line that we created here, put it in the first input.  And now when you run this node, it creates this nice tree trunk. Now our line is a little bit short. So I'm going to make a bit longer. Okay, so now we have our tree trunk. It has some.  Some settings that we can use to change the radius.  But the most important part of this is that we start with a base here, the tree trunk.  And then from then on, we can add these branches. So now if you press tab again and type labs tree branch generator.  You will see that it has two inputs here, the mesh input and the curve input. And both of these are also output here by the tree trunk generator.  You can see that they slot in perfectly like this. And how when you run this branch generator is going to generate these branches based on the shape of the trunk.  And we will be coming back to a lot of these settings, but just so you know that this is where most of the designing of your plant or tree is going to happen.  Okay, so the most important thing for this tree branch generator is this.  Here in this advanced step. So if you're here in general in your trees, this is advanced step and this is detangle, which is on by default.  And what that does is that it tries to put the push the branches apart from each other.  And I want that in general, that's not something I want to do because I want to control the branches as much as I can.  So if you could, most of the time you should just go to general and then to advance in this turn off this detangle.  You'll see that the branches look a little bit boring now, but we'll get to that in a bit.  And what is important here is that there are these two outputs, right? So there's this mesh output and the curve output.  But when you run this by default, it's going to show you the mesh, which is actually something that for this purpose that we're building is not an important, very much more interested in the lines that it's generating.  And to show you that I'm just going to create this no object. If you don't know the no object is just basically the checkpoint. If you run that it's going to show you the output of whatever node you're putting in there.  And most people use it as a sort of.  This is the end of an effect or this is an important checkpoint in the middle of the system that you might want to reference later.  For now, I'm just using it to visualize the lines that are being generated by the tree trunk generator here.  And it's going to call this tree trunk line so that I know what it is.  And you can just put the output of this no in here. Nothing. It doesn't actually do anything. It's just to in this case to visualize the line.  And it's just a nice way to organize your project. Just going to copy and paste this no to show what these lines are doing.  And what you'll see is that these tree trunk generator creates these extra lines.  And also it still keeps this middle line. Right. So it still keeps the line from the from just the trunk.  Yeah. And so what you're building here is this unified plant or now it still looks like a tree, but we can make it look like a plant later.  And you can just keep adding these tree branches to add more. So now when I copy and paste this tree branch generator.  Copy and paste it down there and make sure that the right inputs go in there. There's like this. No, here. Right.  And now if I run this again, we have more branches. So you can see that each of these nodes are is adding more branches based on the level that came in before that.  Right. That's still looks a bit funky, but you can see that this is a kind of a nice way to add a lot of detail to this plant.  And very easy to control. I'm going to copy and paste this no one more time to visualize the lines.  And so one one important thing is that make sure that you name these properly.  So this could be like branch one.  Just going to create a color node just to visualize why it's important to name these.  So if you connect this no object to this color here and make it.  If you color blue, then all the lines are blue. But here there's this group settings. And if you go in there, you can see that there's this level zero level one level two, but also branch one and branch two.  And so these groups are being generated based on the name of this node here. Right. So if I.  And now it's called branch two. So it's important to name these properly because it's and we're going to build our object and then split it apart again later. And in the end, you're going to have.  You're going to have this workflow of building different elements, adding attributes to them.  And it's important that we're able to split them apart and then merge them together and just.  It's just much nicer if you have the right names here. So this is how we generate our tree model.  And even though we only are only using three nodes here, we can make something quite complicated and quite pleasing to look at.  And there's two ways of doing that versus like a scatter and you can choose how many branches there are, which I think is useful for the main branch.

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\yan-paul-dubbelman-procedural-nature-procedural-living-plants\frame_001.jpg

### Stems and Branches: Branch Expansion [10:07]
**Transcript:** But then for the second branch, what I tend to do is to instead of using scatter uses edge length.  And it's like how the bigger this edge length is the further apart these branches will be.  And the smaller they will be the smaller they are the closer they will be to each other.  If you make it very small, it's going to be a lot of them.  Okay, the other important part here is this is going to branch one again to the branches branching angle.  So if you change that the angle of the branches changes.  And there's a very nice setting here is called tropism.  Tropism basically means how you can see nature that most of the time branches and flowers are pointing towards the sun.  So they're pointing up and in this case, if you put this tropism, the standard one, if you turn it on, you can sort of bend these branches to face up.  As if they're going pointing towards the sun.  If you turn this off, it's more like a tree and if you turn it on, it's more like a plant, more flexible branches here.  Let's see what else.  Yes, another thing, of course, is how long they are.  They have the basic length here.  But also you have this length ramp.  And so you can see that right now the branches start here somewhere about a third of the way.  So you take this down and it's going to start lower or higher.  And right now they're like in this sort of stepping transition, but you can actually just linearly interpolate these.  So if you turn the top, make it gradually go down like this, might be a nice effect.  And the same of course with the second branch, all of these work together quite nicely.  Yeah, I would say it's a very flexible and fun way to generate different branches.  And same here with this, let's go to the tropism and do a little bit more.  And there's also this graphite to pism.  I'm not sure if this is a scientific term, but at least it makes sense when you click on it.  So instead of bending, bending with the bending along the line of the branch.  But this is doing is that sort of pulling the lines up based on gravity.  Or it feels like gravity at least.  Maybe one other thing to show you is that here when you generate them, there's this branching pattern.  So nature's full of patterns.  And the one that I also like is this sort of 90 degrees, it looks a lot more organized, maybe a bit too much.  And you can add some variation here.  So if you turn this very low, you'll see that sort of gets this sort of kind of feeling.  Right, but so I hope you can see that with just these three branch tools, you can create a pretty interesting model.  And that's where most of the people stop using them.  You have like a nice model and you can texture it.  And then you have a nice tree. The way that I, if you know my work, you can see that everything always has a little bit of movement or sometimes a lot of movement.

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\yan-paul-dubbelman-procedural-nature-procedural-living-plants\frame_002.jpg

### Stems and Branches: Curling Animation [13:17]
**Transcript:** So what we want to do is to take these curves that are being generated here and make them come alive.  Now that we have this, what we want to do is to animate this and you we're going to be repeating this pattern a few times where we have this model and then we're going to split apart and then we're going to merge it again.  And it's to the part and merge it again.  It will make sense in a minute.  So the way I tend to do this is to use this blast node.  Basically just means delete.  And most of the time it has a few more nuances, but for now we're just going to use it to delete stuff.  So if you run this blast node, I'm just going to split trunk.  And I'm going to use this blast node to delete everything except the trunk.  So if I go to this group here and now you're going to see that it's going to actually delete the trunk or we want everything except that.  It's like delete non selected. There's also the split node, which of course also works.  But in our case, so what this does is that it's sometimes easier to do it because you can split one part and then the next part and then the next part within one network within one sort of stream.  But I tend to use the blast node because I really want to separate things.  And maybe it's just a personal preference, but just follow along with me and you're of course free to use that split node if you want.  Yeah, so now I have my trunk again.  And there is one thing about this that I don't really like that much is when you run this split trunk and you have these point visualizations.  And I make my points a bit bigger just for visualizations.  So you can do that here, like I'm pressing D in your display here, go to guides and then the point marker size increase that your points get a bit bigger.  Just it'll be easier to see if these are a bit bigger.  But I think I'm your screen default size should be OK.  But you can see that these points are being generally, but they're not spaced evenly.  Which is going to result in some sort of choppy animation.  Which we don't want to rebuild this curve here.  There's this node called resample.  Put resample in here and run it.  And you will see that right now the points are generated more evenly.  And it's based on this length here.  So again, similar to this branch, if you increase the length, there will be fewer points.  And if you decrease, then there will be more.  There's two ways to use this.  I tend to use the second one here, like this maximum segments.  So if you turn off the length and turn on the maximum segments, you can very clear, very specifically say how many points you want.  I usually use the segments when it's about large shapes, like this tree trunk.  And then when it comes to smaller shapes, like the branches later, I tend to use this length.  And because it's a bit more predictable.  And sometimes the longer curve needs fewer points, but anyway, it'll make sense in a second.  Just when you can, if you use this resample here, you can see that you can, they're evenly spaced, which is what we need.  Now we're going to use just a tiny bit of code.  So we need a node called a rig wrangle, rig attribute wrangle.

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\yan-paul-dubbelman-procedural-nature-procedural-living-plants\frame_003.jpg

### Working with Curves: VEX Code [16:32]
**Transcript:** So what this sort of rig tools, what they do is take your points and basically turn them into joints, right?  They call joints, this is little, little skeleton, like little, little bones.  If you have your finger, all right, like this one point, second point, third point, and then maybe just one up here as well.  And when you, and what this allows you to do is to turn all of them separately.  So like you can get this nice natural, natural movement.  Yeah, we're going to call this curl, because we're going to use it to curl our curves.  I'm just going to copy and paste a code I always use, but we're going to go over how this works.  I'm just going to go over each of these things and what they mean.  Okay, so what this does, there's this function called pre rotate for now, this pre you can ignore, but it's mostly this rotation that we're looking for.  So what we want is to rotate each point here, based on the specific number.  And, and then we want to control that number, right, like how much it rotates.  So here it's using the so it's called local transform basically just imagine that each point has a position rotation and skill.  It's called the local transform.  And we're going to manipulate that using the second part here right now just set to 0.1, we're going to be replacing this later.  So it's going to rotate 0.1. I think degrees probably.  And then there's this is looking for this orient attribute right so it's it's going to use the local transform rotated a little bit, but it needs this orient attribute.  So it's basically it needs to know how the line is orientated like which point is facing when you use tools like cinema for the and probably blender as well.  This gets baked in when you create a curve or when you generate a curve, but in who didn't they want you to be very specific about each step it's not going to generate these things for you automatically.  So we have to do that for who didn't and let's do that right now.  Luckily for us there is a very nice note called orient orient along curve.  And if you put that in between this re sample and our curl curve.  Nothing's going to happen yet because we have to go to these if you.  If you highlight this orient long curve, it's go down just a little bit. There's these different outputs attributes.  Attributes that it can generate.  And the one that we want you would think it's this quarter neck, but actually what we want is this three by three transform.  So basically what we want to do is again this transform right each point has its position rotation and skill and we want to use we want to generate an attribute there.  And by default is called transform but we're just going to rename this to orient.  And you will see that our curve.  Curved curled this a little bit.  So right now our beautiful machine is already working.  It's using it's trying to rotate these points based on this number here.  So if you increase this 0.1 if you increase it to 0.2.  Me 0.2 going to curl more.  And then 0.5 going to make a full circle.  So this is nice you get this sort of curling that we're looking for.  But right now it's a very uniform movement.  But what we want to do is to control this movement. So we have a lot more.  So we can art direct the way it curls.  The best way that I found to do this is to use an attribute.

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\yan-paul-dubbelman-procedural-nature-procedural-living-plants\frame_004.jpg

### Working with Curves: Growth Animation Set-up [20:35]
**Transcript:** Right. And this is where my favorite part of Houdini comes in is that you're allowed.  At least I'm allowing myself to create attribute names that make a lot of sense to me.  And I call this attribute life.  And to do that you just want to replace the 0.5 with.  At right so at.  Which means attribute and then just type I'm just going to type life.  Now not going to do much because we didn't create life yet.  And to do that we're going to create a new attribute.  And we're going to just create a new node called attributes.  I'm just going to type the shortcut attribute adjust float.  A a S. This is this is a way to create attributes create life.  And so here there's this attribute name right by default is to set to peace go.  And if you just create turns into life.  Nothing much happens yet because our value is zero.  So if you increase this.  You can see it starts to curl.  So now it's basically the 0.5 we had before.  But now we just get to control it here and this attribute.  It's curling but it's still very uniform.  So what we want to do is scale how much it curls based on where or based on.  Yeah.  Based on the length of the curve, the curve here.  Yeah, there's this in this recent point note.  Let's just call this line points number.  This is tab here at the bottom which has curve view attributes.  And what that means is it just creates an attribute that starts from zero here.  By the way up to one to the tip.  And we can use this curve view attribute to.  Yeah to our direct our curl.  So if going back to this attribute that just floats.  There's this life.  There's this pattern here is basically means like how do you want to generate this attribute.  And right now it's at the constant right just like once simple slider.  But if you set this to remap attribute.  You can use a different attribute that comes in.  If you use that to remap the values.  Now the source attribute here you scroll down a little bit.  By default set the mess.  But if you turn this into curve view.  Now you suddenly have our.  Curl right.  So you can see that in the beginning still quite rigid because it's at the zero.  And then all the way at the top it's going to.  Curl a lot.  If you increase this max value we're going to see our curl.  Curling.  This is the way to control these.  Curls.  Now one thing that's important here before I move on to animating this.  So this oriental on curve.  Just call this create.  Orientation.  It has a lot of different values and attributes.  There's additional rotations and you can use this to angle.  The your.  Your curve.  And there's also the skill.  If you decrease the skill is a little bit you can.  Get this nice.  I call them like nightmare before Christmas.  Yeah, so this is how I create all the curls just one line of code and then using this attribute.  Live to.  Do our direct the curl here.  Now we're going to start animating that.  So what we want to do is.  To use.  So basically.  Play with this max value here right.  So if you said this is zero it's going to be straight line.  And if you said it to.  Higher than zero.  Start to curl.  So this movement here.  We want to be able to generate that.  And then we're going to create a lot of automatically or.  We want to animate that.  To do that.  What we're going to create is this.  Again, like this magical.  Life force.  And we wanted to spread through our shape.  And.  There's this.  So now I'm going to use that plugin.  If you don't have that.  Then I'm going to just show you a different version.  But using this plugin.  There's a few things you can do.  That make it a lot more.  If you want to create a more.  You can, you can go to your website.  You can go to your site.  And.  It's a lot easier to control.  It's called this.  Mops, right?  The sweet.  It's called mops.  It stands for motion operator.  So this is mostly used for motion design.  I use it for all kinds of things.  But it just has some sort of preset effects.  This is free, by the way.  Preset effects that you.  That are very useful for all kinds of different effects.  And the one that we're going to be using is this.  to start with our trunk here, keeping it simple, just from where I split the trunk, I'm going  to go into this mob spread, this line point number, actually, it's a bit more easier to see.  So what this allows you to do is to spread and attribute through an object.  And what's important for that is that you need to start point group, basically, yeah,  so which point do you want the spread to start from?  And if you use this visualizer here, if you display the point numbers, you can see that  all of these points have their own number.  And you can see the very first one is not one course, but zero.  If you type in zero here, and click this preview follow, your line should turn blue.  And not much happens now, but if you go to this animate tab, there's this spread.  And if you increase that, like this, here's this magical, that's why I like to call it life.  It feels like it's life flowing through this curve.  And so if you animate this spread here, it's going to flow through our curve here.  I told you there's only one line of code, but that's because I'm just going to show you a  sort of little expression that I like to use for animation.  Of course, you can just simply keyframe this, but I'm just going to use my my favorite expression  here, which is the fit expression.  You can just type with me or you can keyframe this if you want.  What you can do here is to change the range of the frame number where we're at into a different  value, but either type with me or keyframe it.  So FIT, right, fit, open parentheses.  And we want to use this number here, like the frame number, as our input number.  So to do that, you have to write dollar F and then comma one from one to maybe frame 200  here.  And so we want to go from one to 200 and then go from zero, zero, no life to one, a lot  of life, and then close these parentheses and press enter.  And so now when you press play, it's make sure that you press this little clock here,  so you can actually see the frames per second instead of it.  And now it's just trying to play as fast as it can.  But if you press this stopwatch here, this clock here, you can see that it is playing,  right?  And we don't have a lot of points, so it's a little bit choppy, but this will get better  in a minute.  And so you can see that right now, there are magically, there's this attribute spreading  through our curve.  We can turn the put that into our create orientation here, right?  Just plug it in.  And you go to our curve curve, and you can see it's generated earlier this attribute,  but it's still propagating throughout our whole network.  And now if you go to this spread follow up, you go to this, you see here the follow attribute.  It's called mobs follow up.  So in this create life, what by default is operation when you create our attribute is  set to add.  And I'm just going to add zero and one to our curve.  But actually you want to set this to multiply, basically, yeah, multiplying it, right?  So right now, in the beginning, it's zero.  And at the end, it's allowed to go to one.  So now our line is curved and it's going to curl like this.  So you can see that when you play this, like this magical life attribute is actually bending  our curl here.  So right now it's bending it into a curl.  I think it would be nicer to have it aband from a curl.  So you can press this inversion.  So right now it starts from a curl.  And when you play this, it is actually turning back into a line.  Right, nicely.  Now you can see that it stops here, right?  Like why doesn't it turn back into a full line?  And that's because of this follow up with if you increase this width, it's going to be  a smoother transition.  You can see when you animate this right now, it's a lot smoother, the way that this transitions.  But it also means that this final number here needs to be a bit higher.  Okay, so if you right now, if you go from zero to one to zero, point with the eight four.  Right, if you do that, then now it's going to be able to turn fully into a line.  And just to make this work procedurally and nicely, what I'm just going to do is do  quick hack.  So it needs to go from zero to one plus whatever this number is.  You can just write plus and then copy this parameter.  Just right click on this not off on these words here.  Copy parameter and then go after the plus here and then paste relative references.  And now it should go from zero to one no matter.  So you can see the changes here, no matter what you do.  Right, so you can make this very smooth or very choppy up to you.  Going to work.  So this is the way that this mobs is spreading our attribute through this branch here.  And you can see that right now it's said to our trunk, right?  So we're deleting everything except our trunk.  But if you turn this into our branch one here, like, just delete that.  Now we have our other brains that are also working.  When here comes the magic of Houdini, he said, when you build your tools to work procedurally  and to work together really well, you can just change the input and everything will work  as expected.  Okay.  But what is it not being done here?  And I just disabled this split trunk here.

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\yan-paul-dubbelman-procedural-nature-procedural-living-plants\frame_005.jpg

### Working with Curves: Unfurl the Curl [30:56]
**Transcript:** You can see that it's when you played is if you release all the lines together, this  looks quite nice.  There are two issues.  Number one is that they're not connected, which will fix a bit later.  But what I also don't like is that this middle tree trunk is already, like, that you can  see the spread is already here somewhere at the middle.  And the ones here at the top, they're also already going.  We do not, it's not based on, it's not spreading throughout the whole shape.  It's like spreading separately from everything.  So what I'm going to do now is to connect all these curves together.  So we can our direct the spread in a very, very nice and art-directorable way.  And I would do is just disconnect these two.  If you press Y, you get these nice scissors and you can just cut these lines here and  make sure that these are back to the way that they were.  Sure, that this is set again to this trunk.  Okay.  So now we just have our trunk on this side.  And we're just going to generate all of these life materials off to the side and then  we're going to recombine them in a minute.  So what I want is to, before I split everything apart, I want this full shape to be in here.  Yeah, so you can see like this, it's working, but it's not really connected very well.  It has to do with this distance metric, where it now is set to radius.  It's just going to start from a point, this point zero here, and go increase a radius  like a sphere increasing from that point, which in this case looks not super terrible,  but if you start to use more lines later, more input curves, it's going to not work  as predictably as it can, as it can.  So let's first figure out what this first point is.  So here we go, there's this 5,626, which, yeah, you could type that here, but there  must be a better way to do that and turns out that there is.  So what we want to find is this first point of this, this first trunk node here, right?  And the way to do that is to create a slight little split here.  And I'm just going to alt, I think option or alt, click on this line here and you create  this little dot.  And this is just use the organized things a bit better.  And then under this dot, I'm going to use our blast again that we had before.  Again, use our trunk and delete non selected.  So we have our trunk.  You don't have to worry about the spacing here in this case, because all we are carrying  about is this first number here, the zero.  And to automatically choose that, we go to our new node called a group expression.  And this is my way of being able to say we are only going to use one line, let's say  only one line of code is really necessary for this, this session.  There's one more line in here, but I'm not typing it.  So it works that way.  So if you, this group expression, let's call it create root group, it's like this, the  zero here as the root of our plant, right?  If you run that not much happens, because so what this can do is it can create a group  based on a sort of expression.  I'll show you in a second, make sure that this group name here is to root.  And the group type is set to points.  And this is why I love Houdini.  There's some hidden sitting somewhere.  Here you can type in expression, like you're a little bit of code.  But if you click on this button here, there's our first point of primitive.  So happy that this exists.  But what this does, you can see that when you click that, there's this code here,  but it selects this first point here, turn yellow.  So right now it turned this first point here into a root, into our root group.  And then if you go to this mobs spread, and instead of the zero here,  delete that, go to here and there's now this group here, to turn this off.  And now we have the same thing that we had before, but it's generated procedurally.  So whichever curl you, sorry, curve you put in here is going to find this original root.  That's where I find the first point and call it root.  Okay, that's great, but we just want to do the root of our trunk here, the main curve.  So now we have to take this root point and apply it back to our main structure.  And to do that, we have to use a node called a group copy.  And what this is going to do, it has two inputs.  First, the first input, let's put our full tree.  I was going to get angry because it doesn't have a second input.  So we can just put our here, this create root group in here.  And what this allows you to do is basically copy from the second input a group.  Right?  So in here, in this point groups here, just make sure to set the root.  If you then put this in here, now you can see that it should start from the center,  but it this might have to do with another issue.  When you see this root group, and you go to our point numbers here, you can see that right  now it goes from zero to whatever the most points are, right?  But if you go, if you run our full tree, you can see that right now these numbers are  different.  So we actually cannot copy, but we have to use a transfer.  And what that does is that it transfers the group, instead of a group copy, you group  the transfer, when mistake, excuse me.  And then this group transfer, go to the point groups and then type root.  Right now should work.  So you can see that this point here is now red, right?  Our root, but also it found these other points here, and it has to do with this distance threshold.  If you just turn this down, it's going to actually, because they're completely overlapping,  right?  So this threshold can be very small, zero one, right?  So now just only selecting this first root group here.  And let's see.  Right, so now you can see that it starts at this root.  Now it's spreading quite nicely.  All right, so this is working, but we still have this sphere, sphere call falloff effect

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\yan-paul-dubbelman-procedural-nature-procedural-living-plants\frame_006.jpg

### Creating a Natural Look: Animation Spread [37:23]
**Transcript:** going on because of this radius.  So what we want to have to use is actually this connectivity.  Okay, so something is happening, but now we don't have this nice sort of spreading  through the object feeling.  And that has to do with that actually these different objects here, they're not connected.  And now these are just separate shapes that are generated within space, but they're not connected.  So we want to do that.  We want to connect these together.  And I'm going to use a sort of a brute force method.  What I'm going to do is just add all, create just a lot of points in here.  So if you look at these points, it seems like a lot, but they're still quite a big distance  between these.  So what I want to do first is just to create a lot of points within our curves using  this resample, right?  We're just going to use this call this life attribute points in this maximum segment  length.  I'm just going to type 0.01.  So this actually already looks like a beautiful artwork, but all of these are individual  points, right?  So there's a lot of them now because what we want is to have these, the main branch here  and these branches to be able to connect to each other.  Actually, maybe I even want some more.  There's just a lot of points here.  So now they're very close to each other.  So it's much easier for these points to find each other when we fuse them together,  which is what we're going to do now.  So there's this fuse node.  That's why I put it over here.  After we create these points, right?  And there's this sort of snap distance.  And if you increase that, you will see that eventually going to eat up your whole tree.  But if you just make it a bit larger, this 0 0 5, which is good.  You can see the difference between this life attribute points here and this fuse that  side here, this moment where everything turns into one object.  And to visualize that there's this connectivity node, right?  Just put that in there and then it raises attribute called class.  And if you press this button here, you will see that right now,  it's just one object.  But if you bypass this fuse node, you will see that all of these curves are separate objects.  But now there's one after you're fusing them together.  All right.  So now if we use this spread fall off, just let's play it and look at the magic here.  You can see that right now it's spreading through the shape.  I mean, for me, I could look at this all day.  And it's like spreading through very gradually and naturally and everything's connected together.  And what you can do now in this spread fall off is even add some noise here.  It's like it's applying noise.  Maybe it's hard to see, but now it's just slightly less uniform, right?  Or maybe the amplitude can be a bit bigger.  So this isn't randomness here.  Some very nice, natural random smoothing.  Okay, that's great.  But now we have our weird super high resolution lines here.  So how do we get this attribute back into our simple curves that were curling on the other side?  So I'm going to use sort of a simple technique to export basically our settings, our attributes  here and apply that later.  So first I'm going to create this null object again.  Again, like this sort of like a checkpoint object.  Put it in there and call it spread attribute.  If you run this, it's just going to see the same thing.  So we want to take this attribute and apply it to our other curves.  And what we want to do is load in this null.  And to do that, you can use a node called object merge.  And again, object merge.  And what I do is that I select both of these and go to the color here and make them the same color.  Let's say I think this nice color over here.  And make sure that you call this get spread.  And then you can just drag the null and drag it in here.  So now if you run this node here, you can see just simply get this attribute.  Now what did we do all of that is because now we can take this object, scoot it over here.  And we can now apply the attribute into our, this is our more simple curve.  You can apply this attribute onto these lines.  And to do that, you use an attribute transfer.  And so the first input needs to be the objects you transfer attributes to.  And the second is the attribute, the source of the attribute.  Not going to see much now because first we have to type in which attribute.  I'm sure you remember which one we want to have the live attribute.  And just for now, because we want to visualize this attribute.  We also want to color that is being generated by our mobs here.  Right? So why are mobs spread fall off?  Also, you can select your node and just turn this red.  Well, I turn this red when I know that this is a pretty important node with a lot of controls.  I want to come back to later.  You can see if you are quite far away from your network.  It's nice to have these colors to lead your eyes.  And so you can see that here in this fall of preview, this is what defines the color.  The preview color.  You can choose whichever you want.  Like what's nice.  But yeah, I'm just going to keep it to our default infrared for now.  And we can of course change these colors later.  And then we can change the color.  So red is dead and blue is alive.  Okay, so now if we go in here, we want to also transfer that color.  And if you just go to life and you get the sort of shortcut in Houdini for the color attribute is CD.  Since for color diffuse, but basically sense for color.  So now we're going to change the color.  And we just go to life and the sort of shortcut in Houdini for the color attribute is CD.  Since for color diffuse, but basically sense for color.  And now it should you should see that.  The attribute gets spread into our simple object.  Okay, and if we just make sure that this attribute transphics into our split trunk.  And now.  Our.  Curl is curving.  Sorry.  Our curve is curling based on this attribute that is generated over here.  Right.  And even if we bypass this split trunk.  It's going to be like I'm not connected yet.  It's the next step.  But if you play this, you can see it starts here.  And then once it reaches there, it's going to spread through there and spread through there.  And then you get this very nice organic opening with all the different noises and things that the mob spread is generating.  You can see some of them are not opening as fast as the others.  Okay, already very beautiful, but we're not done yet.  We have to connect them together.  So that's the next step.

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\yan-paul-dubbelman-procedural-nature-procedural-living-plants\frame_007.jpg

### Creating a Natural Look: Fusing the Curves [44:21]
**Transcript:** All right.  So we have our nice animation here already definitely Instagram worthy, but not as good as it can be.  So one of the things that people get stuck with.  And stop on these labs.  Three tools is that.  Well, the original object might look very nice.  It's very hard to animate it and people start to use different deformers and bending and things and gets you somewhere, but it's not this very natural movement.  And my personal artistic goal is to create this sort of unified.  Life.  System.  And what I want to have happened is that these curses, they should be really connected like for real.  And to do that, we can actually.  Make them.  Deform each other.  We're going to split apart our lines again and then use our lines to deform each other.  I'm going to do a little bit of cleanup.  I'm going to put a window around these.  You can click in this button here.  Oh, sorry, not this one, but this one copy and paste.  Okay, again, first in the middle here, I'm going to outclick to create this sort of branching point here.  And then I'm going to copy and paste these.  You can also hold out and drag.  And then you have separate one already connected to this middle point here on the left side here.  We're going to have just our tree trunk.  And then on this one, we're going to have our level one.  A branch one, make sure you remove this trunk here.  So we have now these are first level.  So what we want to do is to connect these curves.  So this, these curves, you want to connect them to these curves.  Now the trunk, but split.  Range one.  So to do that, there are some different techniques.  And I found that the most useful one, the one that works the best for me.  It's actually not a note that you would expect.  So it's a note that's mostly used for hair.  I guess it makes sense because hairs are just curves and we're using curves here.  But it's called a guide guide the for.  So there's this node called guide before.  And this guide word, most of the time it refers to Houdini's hair systems.  So you can use curves guide the way that the hair grows.  But I found that this is a very flexible and powerful note to, to deform these curves here.  Okay, so it has a lot of inputs.  I'll go over each one of them.  But the first one is the required geometry to be to be the form, which is our, which are these branches here.  Right, we want to deform these.  This first branch based on the trunk here.  I'm gonna put it in there, not gonna do much now because I need some more stuff.  It first means this rest skin is basically means the sort of reference object.  So basically either before it's deformed or after it's deformed, it makes sense in a second.  So to do that, I'm just going to create a time shift node.  And what this does is it's basically, oh yeah, so by default, I'm just gonna put it in here.  Sorry, put our branch in here by the fall.  It doesn't do much, but here in this frame number right now it's a $2 F.  I don't know if you remember, but it's like this number here.  So every frame basically just going to play normally.  But if you hold control and shift and press on here, it's going to remove that expression.  You can also right click and then click delete channels.  And what I want to do here is because when it's curled, it's actually quite deformed.  Right, so it's already deformed.  So it doesn't feel like a good reference.  I want to use the last frame where it's completely uncurled.  But that makes sense.  So to do that, you can just write $F.  So again, the frame number and then end.  So what this is going to do is find your last frame here.  You press this word here to find your last frame.  Yeah, and that will be our rest.  So this is where the plant is done animating.  And you can take this time shift and put it in our rest skin.  And then here there's this animated skin.  And that can just be our tree trunk.  Okay, let's see.  Like this chopping this stuff over here.  It has to do with the orientation of the trunk that comes in.  But it also has to do with this guide to form not expecting you to put in as your skin.  So it's called skin, right?  So imagine like the hair you need to have skin to grow the hair.  But we are putting in a curve, which is a bit, which is an object is not really expecting.  So what we can do is to create something called a polywire.  I'll show you what that does.  Just putting this curve here.  So it just creates some geometry on our curve, right?  It looks nice.  And this guide from just wants to have a little bit of geometry.  So it understands better what the shape looks like.  And you can make this very small 0.01.  And then if you put that in the time shift and in our animated skin.  See what that looks like?  Okay, it's a little bit jittery, but already looks a lot better, right?  And I can actually visualize how this is working.  If you go, I just create a merge node and merge this animated polywire into our,  and our guide from together.  You can see that now actually they are connected.  Yeah, so this is how you connect them together.  And so now we have our first first animation here.  And I'm just going to again, hold out here and drag it over here.  And not branch one, but branch two.  Did I call it?  Yeah.  Oh, again, like I'm just running the first one and then all the way at the bottom here.  So it's curling, but it's not connected yet.  And so here, it's going to remove all of these connections, put this in the geometry to be the form, right?  But what we want now for our rest and our animated skin is actually the output from this guide deform here.

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\yan-paul-dubbelman-procedural-nature-procedural-living-plants\frame_008.jpg

### Creating a Natural Look: Art Directing Branch Direction [50:56]
**Transcript:** Yeah, there's a cleaner way of doing this in my hip file.  That's like a clean up version of this, but I'm just going to make it a bit more straight forward here by.  Alt dragging these two.  And putting our result here, right?  This animated one over here in our polywire.  So you should have dark now, but.  Do see some object coming in and then this time shift is again like at the end of our timeline and make sure that rest is in the second input and are animated in our third input.  See some jittering will fix that in a minute.  But looks like things are connecting quite well.  If you put this through your merge here, it might look a bit odd, but in general, you can see that these curves now are connecting.  Some glitching going on, but in general, they are connecting, right?  And so you get this very nice sort of bend, bend object, bench shape here where these other curves are connected to.  So the reason why it's glitching or sometimes not really working is because this polywire here actually generates and it uses a lot of different attributes.  And what we can do is clean this up a little bit.  So it creates a very, we don't want to.  We don't want it to have a lot of different attributes here.  We don't want it to be too complicated. We just want to have our shape.  We don't want any other hidden attributes here.  So if you create an attribute delete.  And just before this polywire and just click on delete non selected, I think it should already work otherwise.  Okay.  So what I did here, if you go to this polywire, there's this up vector up vector is one of the most.  Let's say, confuting or frustrating.  It's another word you could use.  Parts of using using Houdini.  What is basically means is it needs to figure out which part of the object is pointing up.  And that way it can figure out the how things should rotate.  And so right now it's trying to figure out this polywire is up vector and you can see it's pressing itself up.  And if you set this to a constant by default, it's set to the y axis, right?  So 0, 1, 0.  And so now it's able to figure out how these curves are supposed to be drawn.  Which should get you a pretty clean result.  Let's see if everything put together.  Let's do that over here as well.  Constant.  Oh, let's see again.  So this is the bane of my life, the different up vectors.  What I want you to get from this is that once if you're able to connect all of these lines together, you can get this very nice.  Connected growth.  That's happening over here.  And now I want you to recognize that this is a.  An object that is dynamic, right?  So there's sorry that it's real time.  So while it's animating here, I'm just going to go back to our original shape here.  Just if you go to original shape and just change some of these settings here.  Let's say we make it more droopy.  So let's just change the shape here just a little bit, maybe just fewer branches, but longer.  And in these maybe.  Change this angle here.  Variation and maybe just this.  Yeah, okay.  So we changed some of these settings here.  And now if you go to this merge, then it's still works.  Should still work.  So you can.  And so now I'm playing it.  We don't see the middle branch.  Isn't a color.  It is still there at the branch.  So everything is still connected, but you could actually do this.  Really in real time.  While it's playing, you can change the amount of branches here.  And in general, it should just play.  There's no simulation going on here, right?  So everything is just animating procedurally.  And there's no.  It's no leg, no delay.  And this is how I prefer to work.  Like sometimes I use vellum.  To add a little bit more realistic movement here, but most of the time.  I just want to have a very nice shape that animates quite well.  And then later on, I might add a little bit more animation.  Or sort of simulation there.  My flowers are a bit more intricate, but the big shapes, the plants and trees.  I generate in this way.  We want to create some geometry on these lines.  More hex to make this happen.

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\yan-paul-dubbelman-procedural-nature-procedural-living-plants\frame_009.jpg

### Geometry Creation: Filling out the Curves [56:02]
**Transcript:** This is great.  Now what we want to do here is to add some geometry right to render this.  What I want to do now here with these curves is to generate geometry.  So that is so you get to render it, right?  And what would be great is if we can use the, I'm just going to create another null here.  At our branches.  And so just the first input, right?  We have our null here like the scale of our branches.  Sorry, the mesh output from these branch tools.  I'm just going to call this mesh.  You can see it already has this thickness in here.  Might be a bit thick here.  Let's just change that.  Here the radius here of our tree trunk.  Can maybe put it to 0.2.  Again, you can see like when you change that also the branches change just a little bit.  Based on how thick the branches so that works together.  Then branch one.  So we have this branch over here.  You can see like it has this sort of noiseness like this odd pattern,  which I'm sure is really great if you're making static trees, but we don't really want that.  That's generated by this noise here.  So that if you go to noise in your branches here, there's this mesh noise.  And if you turn that off, you don't get that because we don't need it.  And then branch two of the same advanced.  The.  I was it.  The noise and then the mesh noise and then turn it off to a more clean geometry.  And we can work with the thickness here, which is in the branches.  It's in just in general and then go to radius with thinner.  So this is quite nice.  I think maybe the last ones are a bit too.  A bit too.  Thick still general radius slightly thinner.  All right, so this is a nice radius, but we don't have those in the lines here.  But we actually do have those in the lines.  But.  Yeah, okay.  So we actually do have them in here.  So the way to access this.  How first of all, let's just create some simple geometry using this sweep.  Right.  We use a sweep node for that.  Put that in here, run it.  It's going to tell you something is wrong.  It has to do with the surface shape.  So right now it's expecting a second input, but you can just go here and go to wrong tube.  We have some interesting shapes here.  Change the radius.  And you might see in your shapes that they.  Not.  Orientated again, properly again.  That's why it's my.  And I'm going to run this orientation value.  And it has to do with the attributes that are coming in here.  And it's going to run this merge and go to this.  Information button here.  Let us are quite small, but you can see that there's.  Oh.  Attributes in here that are being generated by the orientation that we needed to curl everything.  And it's generated by this polywire.  And it's a lot of different attributes here.  But we actually don't need most of these.  We just want to have the ones that are controlling the thickness of our lines.  So again, we're going to create an attribute delete.  And I'm just going to call this.  Up lines.  And I'm going to delete.  I'm just going to run this sweep here.  And when you click delete non selected, you should see a lot better shapes here coming from the sweep.  Maybe a bit thick, but you can see the difference between these two.  Like these are odd deforms.  The stored shapes, but if you if you remove those attributes, they actually look a lot better.  And so you can see that the radius when you change these into very small, you get nice again.  And maybe for Christmas lines, but they're all the same size, right.  That looks all right.  But they're all the same size.  They're not using the radius that we defined out of way up there in the branches.  So what we want is to get this thickness of the branch into our sweep here.  And what we need for that is an attribute created by these branches up here.  It's called radius, right.  So that's also what it's called in the branches.  So we want to make sure that this radius attribute is not deleted.  So when you click this delete non selected.  So if you select something, then it will not be deleted.  You can see that clearly if you select a color here, now the color is back in our beautiful shape here.  Yeah, and also the radius has been kept and to actually use that radius, we have to change the name.  And the way I use that the way I do that is use an attribute remap.  I can like remapping values, right.  It's a very common thing you do in Houdini.  And you can call this remap radius to P scale.  P scale is a very common attribute in Houdini.  So you use a lot.  It just means point scale.  So hidden attribute within the points that tells Houdini how large a point is.  And what we can do is to get our original name here radius and change the name into P scale.  And now everything is gone because already so small, but if you turn this up to one, look at that.  Now we have exactly our radius back from our tree that we generated earlier.  And with that, we basically have a renderable object.  One thing also the sweep does, and we just gonna use a UV quickshade in here.  What this also does is generate UVs.  Now it's easy to see, but the sweep node also generates UVs.  They're not perfect, but they are good.  And I use them all the time.  If you just want to create an object that looks fine with the materials you're building, then you can keep it the way it is.  There's some other settings in here that might be useful, but most of the time this is what you want.  And okay.  So now we have geometry.  So you can see here the dip here of the trunk here is like not not closed.  And we can just go up here to this tree trunk generator.  And we can see that it's not close here either.  So if we just turn this down, something like that, it maybe could be a bit more nice, but I'll leave it up to your own creativity to make this more more attractive.  But yes, you can see like this radius actually changes the radius of our sweep over here.  So you don't actually lose anything by spinning apart our tree and building it back up together.  Okay.  And now you have geometry.  There's one more thing I would like to add to these, which you saw on my Instagram as well, which is the fruit, or they can be flowers, or they can be whatever object you want.

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\yan-paul-dubbelman-procedural-nature-procedural-living-plants\frame_010.jpg

### Geometry Creation: Generating Fruits and Flowers [62:59]
**Transcript:** Basically, I want to generate objects that are connected to these lines.  Yeah, like I said, I want to generate this sort of like I on my Instagram.  I have this post about the session.  We have like little balls here, which can be of course replaced with anything else.  But how do you generate that based on these curves?  And we're going to create my favorite setup ever.  And so first we want to only generate them on the ends of the secondary branches.  So we're going to again use this blast in here.  Alright, last, I just can be called a group.  Sometimes it doesn't show the group here, but it does actually exist, I believe.  This I can like a little viewport bug, but there's like this groups over here.  If you just type in branch two and it should work.  Branch two.  Again, delete nonselected. So we just have these branches.  Make sure that you use the curves before you put them in the sweep,  because we just care about the ends of the curves, not the ends of the geometry here.  Otherwise, this won't work.  So I don't know if you remember when we use this group expression.  This is going to be a lot of fun.  Well, we use this to generate the roots of our plant, right?  But what we want to do now is actually find the ends.  And so if you just type here end and make sure the groups that.  Type set to point.  And then there's this expression here that we used before, the first point of primitive.  And you can see that right now it's finding the first point of this.  But we want the end of this.  And now you're going to show I'm going to have to reveal to you my lack of coding skills.  Because I'm not sure how to select the last point in here.  So I'll show you my beautiful tool that I made myself.  So I have my beautiful tool here, my curve endpoint.  And if I just color this.  So I know I'm being a bit obtuse here, but I'm sure that some people who are going to watch this are not going to be able to understand.  But these expressions mean there are smarter people than I will look at these and of course, this is a very small expression.  And it's great.  And you should definitely listen to them, not me.  But if you go here right now and you select our end point here.  Oh, sorry, and delete our existing.  This selects the endpoint.  So how did I do that?  Let's dive into our two here.  And you will see that the curve comes in and I reverse it like to invert the way that the curve is going.  And I select the endpoint, which is the first point, which is the endpoint.  Right. And then I just reverse it back.  And there you go.  The last point.  So these are, this is my amazing, who do you need journey where I just like, I know that there's a smarter way of doing this, but I am not smarter.  So I just make it a way that works for me.  And so this works.  Make sure that you copy this.  I will be able, I don't think I can charge any money for this tool here, but I knew.  If you look at my, all my projects, there's a lot of these silly notes that just wrap up simple, simple notes.  Okay, so this works.  So now we have our end points.  So now if we use a copy to points, put our curve in the second input and just a sphere in the first one.  Make sure that in this copy to points, you have the target points and you select the end point and make the sphere a lot larger.  See, so the skill of this sphere is based on the p scale that comes in of our curves, right? But okay.  Anyway, so now we have a lot of points.  We can be larger still and let's just combine these all together.  And let's go.  And this one.  Now we have a true Instagram post.  You can see that at the end of all of these curves, there's little dots here, this, which is our spheres.  If you go to copy two points and this is running a bit slow for you, make sure you click on this back and instance so it'll go a bit faster.  So how different topic about how that works, but there you go.  And you can see also that they're larger, the spheres that they're larger at the start, then they are at the end, which has to do with the p scale of our curve, right?  And of course, you can remat that and are directed in the ways to fit with what you're building.  Yeah, so that's it.  That's that's basically how I create most of my plans, but now to fully show you how, how nice all of this works.

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\yan-paul-dubbelman-procedural-nature-procedural-living-plants\frame_011.jpg

### Finalizing [67:53]
**Transcript:** I'm going to go all the way at the beginning where we have this line.  So we have the line that gets put in here and then there for branches here, but instead of a line, we can put in any type of curves.  So what I can do here is to create a draw curves, you can just draw a curve.  So in a draw curve, if you click on this button here, you can draw a curve.  It's a little bit more reasonable and issue then run this branches here.  Maybe a bit.  If you just increased these numbers here, it is going to allow to generate fewer curves and just funny drooping here.  So the idea here is that you can draw the curves, right?  So you can just draw a curve over here and it just generates this plant, which is great.  But now if everything works as I would like to, you can just run this and it just works.  And you can change any part of this and it should just work.  And this is how I make most of my plants and of course you can re-sample and subdivide and all kinds of things.  But this is how I create all of the plants.  Yeah, and let me show you real quick how to do this in a slightly less procedural way by using these attributes.  Like by not using mobs, but I really do recommend using that and I'll show you why in a minute.  I'm just going to use my original line here, so you can see now we have our nice line.  Our humble straight up line.  See like change the scale a bit.  The beauty of this mobs spread here is the connectivity, right?  How connected.  And as far as I'm not sure how to use.  I'm not sure how to replicate this in Udini using using attribute triangles.  I'm sure that there again, very smart people will know how to do that.  But I don't.  So I use these the spread fall off.  What you could do if you don't have to install right now is to use an attribute or just float.  And creating an attribute is going to plug that in here.  And I can create this live attribute.  I think I visualize that.  Yes.  Yeah.  And so there's the different patterns here and the one that I found.  Replicates this feeling is this bounding box attribute, bounding box shape.  Because it allows you to choose the Y direction and then press this compute range.  It's going to figure out how tall your shapes are, right?  Zero to 0.5.  And what you can do there is.  Yeah, animate this bound.  I mean, so if you can do that's very similar to what we did at this mobs spread.  It's going to.  Build again.  This type in.  It.  Or F. I fit open parentheses dollar F one to 200.  From zero to what was it.  I point one to maybe using this shape here to clamp it.  Or the other way.  Sorry. Right now because we're using this shape, clamp it, we can still redirect this a little bit.  It's going to put this maximum bit higher.  Six or something.  Yeah. So because we're using this clamping method here, we can still change the shape of this a little bit.  Have a little bit of a smoother transition.  And of course, when you run this, it should work.  So it does work.  But you don't really get that nice spreading that we had in this mobs.  Yeah, it does work.  But it's not that you don't have enough for me.  You don't have enough controls and you don't have enough.  So what it works for me is to go to this path deform and there's different ways of using this path deform.  You can also say arbitrary geometry, a foolproof way.  But this orientation keeps being a way of of messing me up.  It's a combination of what which attributes are being generated from this oriental on curve.  This is affecting things.  And then a polywire, maybe you want to have more or fewer divisions.  Does that work maybe?  Looks a little bit better maybe.  Yeah, so it's a combination between these factors here that are being generated by the polywire and the way that the guide deform is using these curves.  Yeah, so it's a bit still a bit finicky.  Am I unified system?  The dream here is that you can use this to generate the base shapes of your curves.  I think the best way of looking at this up the system here is a should be a very simple way to create a very elegant animation that you can then use to simulate to add geometry or copy points onto or just have to just to have in the background.  If you want to use it that way, I guess not very heavy geometry at all.  So you can use this in the Unreal Engine as well.  You can just render it straight as it is.  But the amount of points here are actually pretty pretty good.  Yeah, but so this is this is the idea.  You can also go to this tree trunk generator there.  So a little bit of noise here in the line you can use.  Although most of the time it's pretty intense.  So a little bit, this is just a simple line with some extra noise in the tree trunk generator, which probably messed everything up again.  But anyway, yeah, this may, if you look at my master file, this should work better.  That was the, there was it.  And let me know what you think.

**Frame:** tutorials\frames\yan-paul-dubbelman-procedural-nature-procedural-living-plants\frame_012.jpg


---

## Structured Notes

### Core Technique
Procedural animated plant growth using Labs Tree tools for skeleton → Rig Attribute Wrangle curl (one VEX line using `prerotate` + `@life` attribute via `curveu` ramp) → MOPs Spread Falloff flowing through fused high-density curves to spread `life` attribute naturally from root → Guide Deform to connect branch levels so each level deforms the next. Result: fully procedural, real-time, no-simulation plant uncurling animation.

### Summary
73m59s Houdini.School live session by Yan Paul Dubbelman (intro to procedural nature series). Builds an animated growing/unfurling plant from scratch using only Labs Tree tools + one VEX line. Pipeline: Labs Tree Trunk Generator + Labs Tree Branch Generator (2–3 levels) for skeleton; Resample for even point spacing; Orient Along Curve (3×3 transform output renamed to "orient"); Rig Attribute Wrangle with `prerotate` + `@life` attribute for curl amount; MOPs Spread Falloff through fused curves to propagate life from root organically; Attribute Transfer back to simple curves; Guide Deform chains levels so parent branch deforms child; Sweep + Attribute Remap (radius→pscale) for renderable geometry; Copy to Points for fruits/flowers at endpoints. Fallback (no MOPs): Attribute Adjust Float with bounding box Y + fit() expression.

### Key Steps
1. **Viewport**: press D → Background=Dark (improves visibility of thin curves)
2. **Tree skeleton**:
   - Line → Labs Tree Trunk Generator → Labs Tree Branch Generator ×2–3
   - **Name nodes** with meaningful names (e.g. "branch_one") → auto-creates group named after node
   - Detangle: **OFF** (predictable branch control)
   - Tropism: ON for plant feel (branches point upward toward sun); Gravotropism: bends branches along gravity
   - Branching pattern: 90° for organized feel; edge length placement for predictable density
3. **Resample**: even point spacing (maximum segments for trunk; segment length for branches ~0.01 for animation)
4. **Orient Along Curve**: output attribute = "3×3 transform"; rename output to **"orient"** — required for Rig Attribute Wrangle to know how curve is oriented
5. **Rig Attribute Wrangle** ("curl"): one VEX line:
   ```vex
   matrix m = local_transform();
   prerotate(m, f@life, {0,1,0});
   @orient = m;
   ```
   - `f@life` drives curl amount (0=straight, 0.5=full circle, 1=over-curled)
6. **Create life attribute** (Attribute Adjust Float, shortcut `aasf`):
   - Name="life"; Pattern=**Remap Attribute**; Source attribute=`curveu` (0 at base → 1 at tip)
   - Ramp controls how much each part of the curve curls (base stays straight, tip curls most)
   - Max value drives total curl amount
7. **MOPs Spread Falloff** (free plugin — alternative at step 11):
   - **Find root point**: Blast → trunk only → Group Expression: `primpoint(0, @primnum, 0)` (first point of primitive); group name="root"
   - **Group Transfer**: transfer "root" group from trunk to full tree (threshold=0.01 since points overlap); prevents radius-based falloff
   - Resample (segment length 0.01) → **Fuse** (snap distance ~0.05) → single connected mesh → connectivity check
   - MOPs Spread Falloff: start group="root"; metric=connectivity; noise amplitude for organic variation
   - Animate: `fit($F, 1, 200, 0, 1)` expression in Spread parameter
   - MOPs Follow attribute drives life multiplier (right-click Copy Parameter → paste as Relative Reference for dynamic max)
8. **Transfer spread to simple curves**:
   - Null → Object Merge ("get spread") → Attribute Transfer to simple branch curves: transfer `life` + `Cd`
   - In Attribute Adjust Float: change operation to **Multiply** → `life × mops_follow_attribute`
9. **Guide Deform** (connect branch levels):
   - Input 1 (geometry to deform): branch curves
   - Input 2 (rest skin): Time Shift ($FEND) → Polywire (radius=0.01, up vector=constant {0,1,0}) → Attribute Delete (delete non-selected, keep only what's needed)
   - Input 3 (animated skin): parent curves polywire
   - Chain: trunk→polywire deforms branch1; deformed branch1→polywire deforms branch2
   - Result: branches naturally follow parent as it animates
10. **Renderable geometry**:
    - Attribute Delete before sweep (keep only radius attribute + necessary attrs; remove orientation artifacts)
    - Attribute Remap: rename `radius` → `pscale` (sweep uses pscale for width)
    - **Sweep** (surface shape=tube/round): uses pscale for thickness; generates UVs automatically
    - Turn off "mesh noise" in Labs Tree Branch Generator
11. **Fruits/Flowers at endpoints**:
    - Blast: keep branch2 curves (before sweep, geometry only)
    - Group Expression: endpoint trick (Reverse → first point of primitive → Reverse back) → "end_points"
    - Copy to Points: sphere in input 1; curves in input 2; target group="end_points"; enable "Pack and Instance" for performance
12. **Fallback (no MOPs)**: Attribute Adjust Float → bounding box Y attribute → compute range → animate max value: `fit($F, 1, 200, 0, 0.5)` clamp via ramp

### Houdini Nodes / VEX / Settings
- **Labs Tree Trunk Generator** / **Labs Tree Branch Generator**: detangle=OFF; name nodes for groups; edge length placement; tropism ON/OFF; gravotropism
- **Resample**: maximum segments (trunk) or max segment length=0.01 (dense for spread/animation)
- **Orient Along Curve**: output=3×3 Transform, renamed to "orient"
- **Rig Attribute Wrangle**: `matrix m = local_transform(); prerotate(m, f@life, {0,1,0}); @orient = m;`
- **Attribute Adjust Float** (aasf): name="life", pattern=Remap Attribute, source=curveu, ramp=0→1
- **Group Expression**: `primpoint(0, @primnum, 0)` → first point of primitive (root or endpoint)
- **Reverse SOP**: used around Group Expression to select last point (reverse → first=endpoint → reverse back)
- **Group Transfer**: transfer root group between geometries (threshold=0.01 for overlapping points)
- **Fuse SOP**: snap distance ~0.05; fuses branch curves into single connected mesh for MOPs spread
- **MOPs Spread Falloff** (plugin): start group, connectivity metric, noise amplitude; animate Spread parameter with `fit($F, 1, 200, 0, 1)`
- **Attribute Transfer**: transfer life + Cd from high-density spread mesh to simple curves
- **Guide Deform**: 3-input node (deform geo, rest skin, animated skin); Polywire with up vector=constant {0,1,0}
- **Polywire**: up vector=constant Y ({0,1,0}) critical for correct orientation; radius=0.01
- **Attribute Remap**: rename radius → pscale for Sweep width
- **Sweep**: surface shape=tube; generates UVs; requires Attribute Delete to remove orient artifacts
- **fit() expression**: `fit($F, 1, 200, 0, 1)` — maps frame range to 0→1 for smooth animation
- **Bounding Box Y attribute**: fallback without MOPs; compute range → animate max

### Difficulty
Beginner-Intermediate

### Houdini Version
H19+

### Tags
[procedural-nature, plants, trees, animation, growth, curl, labs-tree-tools, mops, guide-deform, rig-wrangle, orient-along-curve, sweep, beginner-intermediate]

---

## Related Tutorials
- yan-paul-dubbelman-procedural-nature-high-quality-custom-leaves.md (same artist: UV deform trick, leaf texture baking with Copernicus)
- mops-motion-operators-for-houdini-part-3.md (MOPs spread attribute in different context)
